coronary artery disease (cad)
_Overview and Recommendations|Background
CAD refers to atherosclerotic narrowing of coronary arteries that is often asymptomatic early in the course of the disease but may lead to stable or unstable angina, and/or myocardial infarction with the progressive thickening or plaque rupture of the wall of the coronary arteries. Common risk factors for CAD include dyslipidemia, tobacco abuse, hypertension, family history of CAD, diabetes mellitus, and obesity. Complications include acute coronary syndromes (ACS), ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), acute heart failure, arrhythmias, and sudden death. There is general agreement about approaches to secondary prevention of CAD and its complications. CAD remains the number one cause of death in the United States; see risk scores to assess risk of cardiovascular mortality.
_Overview and Recommendations|Evaluation
Obtain an electrocardiogram (ECG) in all patients with chest pain (Strong recommendation). For patients with acute chest pain and suspicion of unstable angina or acute myocardial infarction (AMI), see Acute coronary syndromes or ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). In stable patients with known or suspected CAD, perform a history and physical and consider selected blood tests. Order ECG stress testing in stable patients with at least intermediate pretest probability of CAD based on cardiovascular risk prediction who are able to exercise with interpretable ECG and order nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) or echocardiography if the ECG is uninterpretable or the patient is unable to exercise (Strong recommendation). Cardiac stress testing is not recommended for routine screening of asymptomatic men or women (Strong recommendation). Perform coronary angiography in stable patients suspected of having CAD if:. there is high likelihood of severe CAD based on clinical characteristics and noninvasive testing if benefits may outweigh risks (Strong recommendation). there is presumed stable CAD, unacceptable ischemia on guideline-directed medical therapy, and candidacy for revascularization (Strong recommendation). Consider coronary angiography in stable patients suspected of having CAD if:. clinical characteristics and noninvasive testing indicate a high likelihood of severe ischemic heart disease in candidates for revascularization (Weak recommendation). stress testing is contraindicated or results of stress testing are inconclusive and there is a high likelihood that coronary angiography results will inform therapeutic options (Weak recommendation). stress testing results are of unacceptable quality but are negative despite high clinical suspicion of CAD and there is a high likelihood that coronary angiography results will inform therapeutic options (Weak recommendation). Do not perform coronary angiography in patients without known CAD who are:. at low risk based on clinical characteristics without any prior noninvasive testing (Strong recommendation). asymptomatic with no ischemia on noninvasive testing (Strong recommendation).
_Overview and Recommendations|Management
Institute the following lifestyle modifications for all patients with CAD:. Limit daily intake of saturated fats (< 7%-10%) and trans-fatty acids (< 1%) (Strong recommendation). Increase daily consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables (Strong recommendation). Encourage regular aerobic physical activity with durations ranging from 20 minutes to 60 minutes/day and recommended frequency ranging from ≥ 3 times/week to 7 days/week (Strong recommendation). Weight management is recommended to achieve and maintain both of:. body mass index (BMI) 18.5-24.9 kg/meter. waist circumference < 40 inches (102 cm) for men, < 35 inches (89 cm) for women. Advise smoking cessation at every visit and assist with smoking cessation support (counseling, pharmacotherapy, and/or smoking cessation services) (Strong recommendation). Administer the following medications to all patients with CAD:. high-intensity statins if aged 21-75 years (Strong recommendation), and consider if > 75 years old (Weak recommendation). antiplatelet agents:. aspirin 75-162 mg/day unless contraindicated (Strong recommendation). clopidogrel 75 mg once daily as alternative for patients intolerant of or allergic to aspirin (Strong recommendation). dual antiplatelet therapy (P2Y12 inhibitor plus aspirin) for patients who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with stent placement (Strong recommendation). angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors indefinitely, unless contraindicated, with left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40%, hypertension, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease (Strong recommendation). Prescribe medications for the treatment of acute and chronic management of angina as needed (Strong recommendation). Do not give hormone replacement therapy, antioxidant vitamins, or folic acid for secondary prevention in patients with CAD (Strong recommendation). Routine follow-up for patients with stable ischemic heart disease:. should include annual review of risk factors, assessment of symptoms, and adherence to lifestyle modifications and medications (Strong recommendation). may include a 12-lead electrocardiogram, screening for diabetes mellitus, depression, and chronic kidney disease (Weak recommendation). See Management of stable angina topic for medical and interventional treatment of symptomatic CAD. See the Revascularization for coronary artery disease (CAD) topic for the indications for revascularization in patients with CAD.
_General Information|Description
atherosclerotic narrowing of coronary arteries that is often asymptomatic early in the course of the disease but with progressive thickening or plaque rupture of the arterial wall may lead to stable or unstable angina and/or myocardial infarction. most common cause of death in United states.
_General Information|Also called
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease (ASCAD). heart disease. coronary heart disease (CHD). coronary disease. coronary atherosclerosis. stable ischemic heart disease (IHD). obstructive coronary artery disease. asymptomatic coronary artery disease. old myocardial infarction (MI). silent MI.
_Epidemiology|Who is most affected
risk increases with age.
_Epidemiology|Incidence/Prevalence
in United states. cardiovascular health declined between 1988-1994 and 2011-2014 in whites, African Americans, and Mexican Americans. based on repeated population-based cross-sectional surveys (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1988-2014). 40,876 adults ≥ 25 years old without prior cardiovascular disease events were assessed for Life's Simple 7 (LS7) score. 51% white, 26% African American, and 23% Mexican American (58% non-United States born). LS7 score based on status of blood pressure, serum lipids, blood glucose, weight, physical activity, diet, and smoking (range 0-14 points, with ≥ 10 or 11 points associated with lower cardiovascular disease, stroke, mortality). optimal cardiovascular health defined as LS7 score ≥ 10 points. adjusted rates of optimal cardiovascular health comparing 1988-1994 vs. 2011-2014 in persons aged 25-44 years (estimated from figure). 38% vs. 24% in Non-Hispanic whites (95% CI for difference 11.1%-19.4%). 15% vs. 12% in Non-Hispanic African American (95% CI for difference 0.3%-5.8%). 25% vs. 17% in United States born Mexican American (95% CI for difference 4.1%-13.2%). consistent results in whites and United States born Mexican Americans aged 45-64 years and ≥ 65 years old. no significant differences in rates of optimal cardiovascular health among Non-Hispanic African Americans aged 45-64 years or ≥ 65 years old. racial/ethnic disparity in optimal cardiovascular health decreased but may be due to worsening cardiovascular health among whites rather than gains among African Americans and Mexican Americans. Reference - , editorial can be found in. 8.5% prevalence of any coronary atherosclerosis in United States military service members. based on cross-sectional study. 3,832 persons (mean age 26 years and 98% male) in United States military who died of combat or unintentional injuries during 2001-2011 had cardiovascular autopsy data analyzed. 8.5% prevalence of any coronary atherosclerosis. 2.3% had severe atherosclerosis (≥ 50% luminal narrowing of ≥ 1 vessel). 4.7% had moderate atherosclerosis (10-49% luminal narrowing of ≥ 1 vessel). 1.5% had minimal atherosclerosis (fat streaking only). Reference - , editorial can be found in. early atherosclerosis present in virtually all persons aged 15-35 years in United States. based on cohort study. autopsies of 2,876 persons aged 15-34 years who died of external causes included. intimal lesions present in all aortas and most coronary arteries. raised lesions present in. abdominal aortas of 13% of white males aged 15-19 years. abdominal aortas of 65% of white males aged 30-34 years. right coronary arteries of 24% of males aged 15-19 years. Reference -. prevalence of significant atherosclerotic disease > 50% in urban dwellers in United States. based on cross-sectional study. 6,814 adults aged 45-84 years without clinical cardiovascular disease from Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis assessed with noncontrast computed tomography. significant atherosclerotic disease defined as coronary artery calcium (CAC) score > 100. no coronary artery calcium in 14%. CAC scores > 100 in > 50%. Reference -. incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) 5.5 per 1,000 person-years in postmenopausal women in United States. based on prospective population-based cohort study. 2,834 postmenopausal women (mean age 65 years) without cardiovascular disease (CVD) in 2000-2002 in United States were followed for median 12.1 years. incidence of cardiovascular events. 5.5 per 1,000 person-years for CHD including definite or probable myocardial infarction, resuscitated cardiac arrest, definite or probable angina if followed by revascularization, or definite CHD death. 9.3 per 1,000 person-years for CVD including CHD plus stroke, stroke death, other atherosclerotic death, or other CVD deaths. 3.3 per 1,000 person-years for heart failure. Reference - , editorial can be found in. incidence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events 16.4 per 1,000 person-years and coronary heart disease events 10 per 1,000 person-years in men with HIV infection in United States. based on cohort study. 1,272 men aged 30-74 years with HIV infection in Massachusetts, United States were followed for median 4.4 years. 5-year incidence of cardiovascular events. 16.4 per 1,000 person-years for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events including myocardial infarction, stroke, or coronary death. 10 per 1,000 person-years for coronary heart disease events including myocardial infarction or coronary death. Reference - , editorial can be found in. prevalence of self-reported coronary artery disease about 6.2% in persons ≥ 20 years old. 7.8% in white men. 4.6% in white women. 7.2% in black men. 7% in black women. 6.7% in Hispanic men. 5.9% in Hispanic women. reported lifetime risk for coronary artery disease 3.6% for men and < 1% for women. reported incidence of new myocardial infarction about 525,000/year and recurrent myocardial infarction about 210,000/year. Reference - , corrections can be found in Circulation 2015 Jun 16;131(24):e535 and Circulation 2016 Feb 23;133(8):e417. review on atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in South Asians in the United States: epidemiology, risk factors, and treatments can be found in. incidence and prevalence in other countries. rates of major cardiovascular events are higher in low-income countries despite lower risk-factor burden compared to high-income countries. based on prospective cohort study. 156,424 individuals from 17 countries (3 high-income, 10 middle-income, and 4 low-income) were followed for mean 4.1 years. cardiovascular risk-factor burden (assessed by INTERHEART risk score) was highest in high-income countries and lowest in low-income countries (p < 0.001, no pairwise comparisons reported). incidence of major cardiovascular events per 1,000 person-years (p < 0.001, no pairwise comparisons reported). 3.99 in high-income countries. 5.38 in middle-income countries. 6.43 in low-income countries. consistent findings for cardiovascular death and all-cause death. Reference -. in the Netherlands, lifetime risk of cardiovascular disease after age 55 years about 67% in both women and men, with cerebrovascular disease and heart failure more common in women and coronary heart disease more common in men. based on prospective cohort study. 8,419 individuals ≥ 55 years old (61% women) without cardiovascular disease from the Netherlands were followed for up to 20 years. 34.3% developed cardiovascular disease. estimated lifetime risk of any cardiovascular disease 66.4% in women and 67.1% in men. women significantly more likely than men to have cerebrovascular disease or heart failure as first manifestation of cardiovascular disease. men significantly more likely than women to have coronary heart disease as first manifestation. Reference -. in England, most common initial cardiovascular disease presentations include ischemic stroke and heart failure in women and myocardial infarction and angina in men. based on cohort study. 1,937,360 adults ≥ 30 years old (51% women) from CALIBER research cohort in England were monitored for development of 12 cardiovascular diseases between 1997 and 2010. 5.9% developed incident cardiovascular disease during median 6-year follow-up. incidence of initial cardiovascular disease presentations varied by gender and age. most common initial presentations by gender. in women. ischemic stroke in 16.2%. heart failure in 14.9%. stable angina in 13.5%. transient ischemic attack in 11.8%. in men. myocardial infarction in 17.6%. unstable angina in 15.2%. stable angina in 11.7%. ischemic stroke in 11.2%. incidence of initial cardiovascular disease presentations by age. incidence of ischemic stroke, transient ischemic attack, heart failure, and abdominal aortic aneurysm increased with increasing age. incidence of other cardiovascular disease presentations decreased or remained similar with increasing age. incidence of most cardiovascular disease presentations (except for subarachnoid hemorrhage and intracerebral hemorrhage) significantly higher in men compared to women in analyses adjusted for age, risk factors, and medications. Reference -. in Bolivia, low prevalence of CAD (8%) in indigenous Tsimane population despite high inflammatory burden. based on cross-sectional study. 705 Tsimane adults > 40 years old were assessed with noncontrast computed tomography and for c-reactive protein (CRP). Tsimane populations follows preindustrial subsistence lifestyle (hunting, gathering, fishing, and farming) in Bolivia. significant atherosclerotic disease defined as CAC score > 100. no coronary artery calcium in 85%. CAC scores > 100 in 8%. high-sensitivity CRP > high-risk cutoff (3 mg/L) in 48%. Reference -. coronary artery disease-related mortality. ischemic heart disease is leading cause of mortality worldwide in 2008. based on retrospective cohort study. mortality data from World Health Organization (WHO) mortality database from 1995-2009 and WHO publications included. 12.7% of global mortality caused by ischemic heart disease in 2008. Reference -. incidence of heart disease-related death decreased from 2000 to 2010 in United States. based on retrospective cohort study. 7,102,778 deaths from heart disease in patients ≥ 35 years old in United States from 2000 to 2010 were analyzed. incidence of heart disease-related death per 100,000 persons comparing 2000 vs. 2010. 500.8 vs. 347.3 for any heart disease. 364.7 vs. 221.6 for coronary heart disease. 39.5 vs. 33.7 for heart failure. rates also significantly decreased for death from hypertensive heart disease, valvular heart disease, arrhythmia, and pulmonary heart disease. Reference - , editorial can be found in. age-adjusted mortality rates for coronary heart disease (CHD) decreased from 2006 to 2008 in England. based on cross-sectional study. 54.3 million persons registered in 152 primary care trusts in England in 2008. mean age-standardized CHD mortality rates per 100,000 European standard population. 97.9 for 2006. 93.5 for 2007. 88.4 for 2008. Reference -. decrease in CHD mortality in Ontario, Canada between 1994 and 2005. based on cohort study. population aged 25-84 years in Ontario between 1994 and 2005 evaluated. age-adjusted CHD mortality decreased by 35% (from 191 to 125 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants). decrease appears associated with trends in risk factors and improvements in medical treatments. Reference -.
_Epidemiology|Likely risk factors
modifiable major risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD). tobacco exposure. includes cigarette or cigar smoking, spit or chewing tobacco, pipe smoking (including water pipe or Hookah), electronic cigarettes, and passive or secondhand smoke exposure. increase in smoking dose (number of cigarettes smoked) and duration (number of years smoking) each associated with increased all-cause mortality, ischemic heart disease mortality, and coronary heart disease. physical inactivity - increased sedentary time associated with increased risk of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and mortality in adults. increased body weight (overweight and obesity). increased body mass index (BMI) associated with increased cardiovascular mortality, coronary heart disease mortality, cardiovascular disease, and coronary heart disease in persons without known cardiovascular disease. increased waist-to-hip ratio associated with increased risk of cardiovascular death, coronary heart disease, and myocardial infarction. hypertension. prehypertension (also called borderline or high normal blood pressure). defined as systolic blood pressure 120-139 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure 80-89 mm Hg in Seventh report of Joint National Committee (JNC7). American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) 2017 guidelines define systolic blood pressure of 120-129 mm Hg as elevated and 130-139 mm Hg as stage 1 hypertension, and diastolic blood pressure of 80-89 mm Hg as stage 1 hypertension. associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, and stroke in cohort studies. combined systolic-diastolic hypertension (systolic blood pressure ≥ 140 mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure ≥ 90 mm Hg) associated with increased risk of incident cardiovascular events and cardiovascular mortality. dyslipidemias. elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and total cholesterol associated with increased ischemic heart disease mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and coronary heart disease. low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease. hypertriglyceridemia associated with increased all-cause mortality and risk of cardiovascular disease and/or events. diabetes. diabetes associated with increased all-cause and coronary heart disease mortality. hyperglycemia (both elevated fasting glucose levels and elevated 2-hour postchallenge glucose levels) associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease and cardiovascular mortality in persons without diabetes. elevated HbA1c associated with increased cardiovascular mortality, coronary artery disease mortality, and all-cause mortality in persons with and without diabetes. metabolic syndrome. refers to combination of risk factors which includes hypertension, obesity, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance. metabolic syndrome associated with increased mortality from coronary heart disease, cardiovascular disease, and all causes. nonmodifiable major risk factors for CAD. family history of premature cardiovascular disease (fatal or nonfatal cardiovascular event at age < 55 years for men and < 65 years for women) associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease and coronary artery disease. genetics - familial hypercholesterolemia often caused by mutations in LDLR, APOB, or PCSK9 gene is associated with severe hypercholesterolemia, a major coronary artery disease risk factor. chronic kidney disease (CKD), including decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR), proteinuria and microalbuminuria. cerebrovascular and vascular disease (such as peripheral artery disease stroke, and abdominal aortic aneurysm). cardiovascular risk categories based on presence of major risk factors. most guidelines automatically assign patients to high or very high cardiovascular risk category if any diabetes or chronic kidney disease. some guidelines automatically assign patients to high cardiovascular risk category if any significantly elevated blood pressure or elevated cholesterol levels. many cardiovascular risk assessment tools include smoking status in method for estimating cardiovascular risk. risk factors generally not included in cardiovascular risk assessment tools that may be considered as modifiers in persons with borderline risk include family history of cardiovascular disease or BMI. see Cardiovascular risk assessment for details. see also. Cardiovascular Disease Possible Risk Factors. Cardiovascular disease prevention overview. see Cardiovascular Disease Major Risk Factors for details.
_Epidemiology|Possible risk factors
possible coronary artery disease (CAD) risk factors include risk factors that. can potentially improve risk prediction for the development of CAD but that lack established evidence for benefit in preventing CAD when they are modified. may also be found in association with patients with established CAD and may improve risk prediction of future cardiovascular events. see Prognosis in Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) for risk factors associated with future cardiovascular events. see Cardiovascular Disease Major Risk Factors for risk factors that have been determined to greatly increase risk of CAD and Cardiovascular Risk Assessment for estimating cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic persons. United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) finds current evidence insufficient to make recommendation for adding ankle-brachial index, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level, and coronary artery calcium score to traditional risk assessment for cardiovascular disease in asymptomatic adults for prevention of cardiovascular disease events (USPSTF Grade I recommendation). biomarkers. addition of multiple biomarkers to traditional risk factors. routine assessment of circulating or urinary biomarkers not recommended for refinement of cardiovascular risk assessment (ESC Class III, Level B). multiple biomarkers associated with cardiovascular risk, but addition to traditional risk factors had only moderate increase in improvement of risk. biomarkers associated with increased cardiovascular and CAD risk in cohort studies include. homocysteine. lipid markers (other than standard lipoprotein levels, including lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 [Lp-PLA2] and lipoprotein[a]). inflammatory markers (including interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein [CRP]). renal markers (including cystatin C). cardiovascular tests. noninvasive imaging techniques may be used to improve cardiovascular risk assessment in patients with borderline cardiovascular risk. risk modifiers that potentially reclassify patients into different cardiovascular risk category include. coronary artery calcium (CAC) score (ESC Class IIb, Level B) (CAC score may be associated with higher risk for cardiovascular disease than carotid intima-media thickness). ankle-brachial index (ABI) (ESC Class IIb, Level B) (high and low ABI each associated with increased cardiovascular and coronary artery disease in cohort studies). atherosclerotic plaque detection by carotid artery scanning (ESC Class IIb, Level B). carotid ultrasound intima-media thickness screening for cardiovascular risk assessment not recommended (ESC Class III, Level A). additional cardiovascular tests where results may be associated with cardiovascular disease and CAD in cohort studies include electrocardiogram findings, heart rate, and carotid bruits. medical conditions associated with increased CAD risk or associated cardiovascular events in cohort studies include anemia, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, migraine, rheumatologic disorders (such as gout and rheumatoid arthritis), atrial fibrillation, and erectile dysfunction. psychosocial factors. multiple risk factors. most individuals that have psychosocial risk factors have clusters of psychosocial risk factors or > 1 risk factor. European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommends considering assessment of psychosocial risk factors using clinical interview or standardized questionnaires to identify possible barriers to lifestyle change or adherence to medication in patients at high risk for cardiovascular disease (ESC Class IIa, Level B). multiple psychological risk factors (assessed using 12-item General Health Questionnaire) associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease in cohort studies. psychosocial risk factors associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease and CAD in cohort studies include depression, stress, socioeconomic status, anger and hostility, anxiety, and emotional health. infectious risk factors associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease and CAD in cohort studies include periodontal disease, sepsis, pneumonia, and Coxiella burnetii. genetic risk factors. ESC recommendations for genetic marker screening for cardiovascular risk assessment. genetic risk scores that combine multiple genetic markers with small effect exist, but no consensus on which genetic markers merit inclusion or how score best calculated. generalized use of DNA-based tests for cardiovascular risk assessment not recommended (ESC Class III, Level B). genetic basis of CAD. CAD likely results from cumulative effect of multiple common risk alleles that each contribute small effect size on CAD risk instead of from rare variants with large effect size on CAD risk. genetic influence likely also contributes to the development of premature CAD. biomarkers reported to be causal (evidence that both biomarker and genetic variant of biomarker associated with increased risk of CAD) in genetic studies include. low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. triglycerides. lipoprotein(a). body mass index. biomarkers reported to be noncausal (evidence that biomarker associated with increased risk of CAD, but genetic variant of biomarker not associated with increased risk of CAD) genetic studies include CRP, Lp-PLA2, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, fibrinogen, and homocysteine. risk factors specific to women. combined oral contraceptives (COCs). current use of oral contraceptives may be associated with increased risk for ischemic stroke but not hemorrhagic stroke or myocardial infarction (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). combined oral contraceptives containing ≥ 50 mcg estrogen associated with increased risk of myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). COCs associated with increased risk for myocardial infarction and cardiovascular death in cohort studies of women who are heavy smokers, which is a major CAD risk factor. hormone replacement therapy (HRT). HRT associated with increased risk for cardiovascular disease, venous thromboembolism, and stroke in systematic reviews and randomized trials. observational studies have inconsistent evidence. see Hormonal Replacement Therapy (HRT) and Cardiovascular Disease for details. obstetric factors. preeclampsia associated with increased risk of subsequent maternal cardiovascular disease and cardiovascular-related mortality in cohort studies. maternal placental syndrome associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, heart failure and atrial dysrhythmia in cohort studies. other possible risk factors include. heavy alcohol use. dietary intake (such as high intake of saturated fat and trans fatty acids). shift work and altered sleeping patterns. see Cardiovascular Disease Possible Risk Factors for details.
_Epidemiology|Factors not associated with increased risk
oral contraceptives without concomitant risk factors not associated with increased risk ( ). Helicobacter pylori infection not a risk factor despite early reports, or only weak association. chronic H. pylori not significantly associated with coronary risk factors. based on systematic review. systematic review of 18 epidemiological studies with 10,000 patients that measured antibody titers to H. pylori and risk factors for coronary heart disease (CHD). no significant associations except for small absolute differences in body mass index (BMI), blood pressure, or hematological risk factors in seropositive subjects. Reference -. no significant association between MI and H. pylori antibodies. based on nested case-control study. 445 male physicians who had myocardial infarction (MI) compared to 445 controls matched for age and smoking. median follow-up 9 years. positive H. pylori serology at baseline in 43% cases vs. 44% controls (not significant). Reference -. no association between H. pylori infection and early onset MI. based on case-control study. 1,122 survivors of early acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and 1,122 controls aged 30-49 years without CHD included. 33% of persons had H. pylori seropositivity. among 510 age- and sex-matched pairs of siblings, no significant association between H. pylori seropositivity and nonfatal myocardial infarction (adjusted odds ratio 1.37, 95% CI 0.87-2.15). Reference - , commentary can be found in. HIV positivity does not appear to be major risk factor for subclinical atherosclerosis. based on systematic review. systematic review of 26 observational studies evaluating subclinical evidence for atherosclerosis in 5,456 patients with HIV infection and 3,600 patients without HIV infection. HIV positivity associated with 0.04 mm greater carotid ultrasound intima-media thickness (p < 0.001). HIV negativity not associated with. carotid plaque. coronary artery calcium. Reference -. nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) may not be associated with increased risk of acute myocardial infarction. based on meta-analysis. meta-analysis of 4 population-based healthcare databases from 4 European countries. 120,795 adults with NAFLD or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and no other liver disease were age-, sex-, practice site-, and visit-matched with up to 100 patients without NAFLD or NASH from same databases. mean follow-up ranged from 2.1 to 5.5 years. analysis included 86,098 adults with NAFLD and 4,664,988 matched adults without liver disease. acute myocardial infarction in 0.9% of adults with NAFLD vs. 0.8% of matched controls (adjusted hazard ratio 1.01, 95% CI 0.91-1.12). Reference -. consumption of certain drinks and foods. coffee consumption does not appear to be associated with coronary heart disease. based on prospective cohort study. 128,493 men and women followed for 20-26 years. no significant association between coffee consumption (< 1 cup/month to ≥ 6 cups/day) and development of coronary heart disease (CHD). Reference - , commentary can be found in. coffee drinking does not appear to be associated with increased risk of nonfatal MI or CAD mortality in men. based on cohort study. 20,179 Finnish men and women aged 30-59 years followed up for 10 years. no significant association between increasing quantities of coffee consumption and nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI) or CAD mortality. Reference -. milk and dairy consumption not associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease or mortality. based on systematic review. systematic review of 17 studies evaluating association between milk and dairy consumption and cardiovascular disease in 2,283 cases of cardiovascular disease, 4,391 cases of CHD, 15,554 cases of stroke, and 23,949 mortalities. milk consumption not associated with increased risk of. CHD in analysis of 6 studies. stroke in analysis of 6 studies. total mortality in analysis of 8 studies. milk intake associated with decreased risk of overall cardiovascular disease (relative risk [RR] 0.94 per 200 mL/day, 95% CI 0.89-0.99) in analysis of 4 studies. Reference -. consumption of food fried with olive or sunflower oil not associated with increased risk of CAD. based on prospective cohort study in Spain. 40,757 adults aged 29-69 years without CAD at baseline followed for median 11 years. adults were stratified by consumption of fried food at baseline. first quarter (47 g/day). second quarter (105.7 g/day). third quarter (158.4 g/day). fourth quarter (249.6 g/day). 62% used olive oil for frying and 38% used sunflower oil or other vegetable oils. during follow-up. 606 definite CAD events occurred. 2.8% all-cause mortality. no association between fried food consumption and risk of CAD in overall analysis (vs. first quarter). adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.15 (95% CI 0.91-1.45) for second quarter. adjusted HR 1.07 (95% CI 0.83 -1.38) for third quarter. adjusted HR 1.08 (95% CI 0.82-1.43) for fourth quarter. similar results in analyses of adults using olive oil or sunflower oil for frying. no association between fried food consumption and risk of all-cause mortality. Reference -. higher egg consumption (up to 1 egg/day) not associated with increased risk of coronary heart disease or stroke. based on systematic review of prospective cohort studies. systematic review of 8 prospective cohort studies evaluating association between egg consumption and risk of coronary heart disease and/or stroke in. 263,938 patients followed for 3,081,269 person-years for coronary heart disease. 210,404 patients followed for 4,148,095 person-years for stroke. 5,847 incident cases of coronary heart disease and 7,579 incident cases of stroke occurred during follow-up. no association between egg consumption (1 egg/day increase) and. risk of coronary heart disease (relative risk 0.99, 95% CI 0.85-1.15) in analysis of 9 comparisons. risk of stroke (relative risk 0.91, 95% CI 0.81-1.02) in analysis of 8 comparisons. Reference -. leptin levels. leptin levels not associated with CHD risk. based on nested case-control study and systematic review. 550 men with fatal coronary heart disease (CHD) or nonfatal MI compared to 1,184 controls and systematic review of 7 prospective studies with 1,335 men with CHD and 3,407 controls. leptin levels not associated with increased risk for CHD. Reference -. plasma leptin levels not significantly associated with cardiovascular disease independent of BMI. based on subgroup analysis of cohort study. 818 elderly community-dwelling Framingham Study participants (mean age 79 years) with plasma leptin assay at routine exam followed for mean 8 years. elevated plasma leptin levels significantly associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease but association nonsignificant after adjustment for BMI. Reference -. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene polymorphism not associated with increased risk for coronary restenosis in patients having percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). based on systematic review. systematic review of 16 studies with 4,631 patients having percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). 1,683 patients had recurrent stenosis at median follow-up 5.5 months. deletion/deletion (DD) genotype was associated with increased risk in smaller studies subject to publication bias and detection bias, but no significant difference in larger studies or more rigorous studies. Reference -. serum potassium and magnesium levels. serum potassium level not associated with risk of cardiovascular disease-related death. based on cohort study. 3,151 persons (mean age 48) followed for mean 16 years in Framingham Heart Study. no significant association between serum potassium level and cardiovascular disease-related death. Reference -. low serum magnesium does not appear to be associated with cardiovascular disease. based on prospective cohort study. 3,531 middle-aged adults followed for 20 years. no significant association between serum potassium level and cardiovascular disease. Reference -. endogenous estradiol not associated with cardiovascular disease in healthy men. based on systematic review. systematic review of 14 observational studies evaluating association between endogenous estradiol and rate of incident cardiovascular disease (myocardial infarction, stroke, or death from coronary heart disease). comparing estradiol levels > 75th percentile to < 25th percentile, no significant difference in rate of cardiovascular disease in analysis of 10 studies, results limited by significant heterogeneity. Reference -. exposure to environmental cadmium or mercury may not increase risk of cardiovascular outcomes. based on systematic review of observational studies. systematic review of 37 cohort and case-control studies evaluating association between environmental toxic metal contaminants and risk of cardiovascular outcomes in 348,259 persons. metal contaminants evaluated were arsenic (12 studies), lead (11 studies), cadmium (8 studies), mercury (9 studies), and copper (6 studies). mean or median baseline levels of contaminants across studies reporting exposure. cadmium 0.43-1.29 mcg/L in blood and 0.28-0.92 mcg/g in urine. mercury 0.004-3.5 mcg/L in blood. relative risk (RR) derived by comparing adjusted risk for each outcome in persons in top third vs. bottom third of baseline levels of environmental contaminants. all results limited by significant heterogeneity. no significant differences in risk of. coronary heart disease comparing higher vs. lower levels of. cadmium exposure (RR 1.29, 95% CI 0.98-1.71) in analysis of 5 studies with 32,070 persons. mercury exposure (RR 0.99, 95% CI 0.65-1.49) in analysis of 5 studies with 9,169 persons. cardiovascular disease comparing higher vs. lower levels of mercury exposure (RR 0.94, 95% CI 0.66-1.36) in analysis of 4 studies with 11, 410 persons. Reference -. mercury exposure may not increase risk of cardiovascular disease. based on nested case-control study of patients from 2 cohort studies. 3,427 with incident cardiovascular disease were compared to 3,427 matched controls without cardiovascular disease for mean follow-up of 11.3 years. mercury and selenium exposure determined by toenail clipping. highest quintile of mercury exposure not associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, stroke, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or fatal coronary heart disease. Reference -.
_Epidemiology|Factors associated with decreased risk
apolipoprotein genotype and other genetic mutations. apolipoprotein genotype. heterozygous mutations in apolipoprotein C3 gene associated with decreased risk of CHD. based on cohort study. 110,970 persons of European, African, and Hispanic ancestry included. 498 persons (0.4%) had heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in apolipoprotein C3 gene (APOC3). APOC3 mutations associated with. lower plasma triglyceride levels (p < 0.0001). decreased risk of coronary heart disease (odds ratio 0.6, 95% CI 0.47-0.75). Reference - , correction can be found in N Engl J Med 2015 Feb 12;372(7):690. heterozygous mutations in APOC3 associated with decreased risk of ischemic vascular disease. based on retrospective cohort study. 75,725 persons in Denmark included. median follow-up 34 years. 260 persons (0.3%) had heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in APOC3. ischemic vascular disease (ischemic heart disease [IHD] or cerebrovascular disease) developed in 14.3%. APOC3 mutations associated with. lower nonfasting triglyceride levels (p < 0.001). decreased risk of ischemic vascular disease (hazard ratio 0.59, 95% CI 0.41-0.86). Reference -. apolipoprotein E genotype not associated with increased risk of CHD. based on cohort study. 22,169 participants aged 44-79 years followed for mean 11 years. no association between apolipoprotein E genotype after adjustment for other cardiovascular risk factors. Reference - , correction can be found in Arch Intern Med 2009 Dec 14;169(22):2108. apolipoprotein E gene episolon-2 allele associated with reduced risk for coronary disease. based on systematic review. systematic review of 121 studies with evaluating association of apolipoprotein E genotypes and coronary disease in 37,850 cases and 82,727 controls. compared to E3/E3 allele, E2 allele carriers associated with reduced risk of coronary disease (odds ratio 0.8, 95% CI 0.7-0.9). Reference -. apolipoprotein E epsilon-2 allele associated with decreased cardiovascular mortality. based on cohort study. 4,917 adults ≥ 65 years old who had apolipoprotein E genotyping were followed for 18 years. 68% were African Americans and 32% were European Americans. ≥ 1 apolipoprotein E epsilon-2 allele in 22% of African Americans vs. 13% of European Americans (p < 0.001). apolipoprotein E epsilon-2 allele associated with. decreased cardiovascular mortality (adjusted HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.58-0.76). decreased all-cause mortality (adjusted HR 0.81, 95% CI 0.76-0.87). consistent results for mortality in African Americans and European Americans. Reference -. low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol from mutations in ABCA1 gene not associated with increased risk of ischemic heart disease. based on pooled analysis of data from 3 population studies. pooled analysis of 3 population studies in Denmark with 56,886 participants including 148 ABCA1 mutation heterozygotes. ABCA1 mutations not significantly associated with increased risk of ischemic heart disease. Reference - , commentary can be found in. angiopoietin-like protein (negative regulators of lipoprotein lipase) genotypes. heterozygous loss-of-function variants in ANGPTL3 gene associated with reduced likelihood of CAD. based on case-control study. 58,335 adults of European ancestry had exon sequencing of angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3) gene. 0.42% had heterozygous loss-of-function variants in ANGPTL3 gene. association between heterozygous loss-of-function variants in ANGPTL3 gene and CAD evaluated by comparing 13,102 adults with CAD to 40,430 controls without CAD. compared to patients with CAD, patients without CAD had higher frequency of heterozygous loss-of-function variants in ANGPTL3 gene (adjusted odds ratio 0.59, 95% CI 0.41-0.85). consistent results in meta-analysis of 5 case-control studies (including this study) with 36,419 cases and 147,596 controls. Reference - (, editorial can be found in ). E40K variant and other heterozygous inactivating mutations in ANGPTL4 gene associated with reduced likelihood of CAD. based on case-control study. 42,930 persons of European ancestry had exon sequencing of angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) gene. 3.9% had heterozygous and homozygous E40K variant and 0.17% had other heterozygous inactivating mutations in ANGPTL4 gene. association between mutations in ANGPTL4 gene and CAD evaluated by comparing 10,552 persons with CAD to 29,223 controls without CAD. compared to patients with CAD, patients without CAD had higher frequency of. EK40 variant in ANGPTL4 gene (adjusted odds ratio 0.81, 95% CI 0.7-0.92). other heterozygous inactivating mutations in ANGPTL4 gene (adjusted odds ratio 0.56, 95% CI 0.32-1). Reference - , editorial can be found in. inactivating mutations in Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 gene associated with decreased risk of coronary heart disease. based on case-control study. 29,954 patients with coronary heart disease and 83,140 controls of European, African, and South Asian descent had exon sequencing of Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) gene. NPC1L1 protein is transporter of cholesterol in gut inhibited by ezetimibe. NPC1L1 gene inactivating mutations associated with. reduced risk of coronary heart disease (odds ratio 0.47, 95% CI 0.25-0.87). lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (mean difference -12 mg/dL [0.31 mmol/L], p = 0.04). Reference - , commentary can be found in. . mutation in asialoglycoprotein receptor 1 gene associated with reduced non-HDL cholesterol levels, and may be associated with decreased risk of coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction. based on cohort study. 2,636 persons in Iceland were analyzed for genetic variants that were further assessed in 140,521 persons from Iceland (85%), Denmark (11%), and The Netherlands (4%) who had serum measurements of non-HDL cholesterol levels. heterozygous del12 mutation in asialoglycoprotein receptor 1 (ASGR1) gene associated with decreased non-HDL cholesterol levels (p < 0.0001). heterozygous ASGR1 del12 mutation was further evaluated in case-control study comparing 42,524 patients of European descent with coronary artery disease (CAD) to 249,414 controls without CAD. compared to no mutation, heterozygous ASGR1 del12 mutation associated with. decreased risk of CAD (odds ratio 0.66, 95% CI 0.55-0.79). decreased risk of myocardial infarction (hazard ratio 0.64, 95% CI 0.64-0.8) in subgroup of 236,254 persons from Iceland. Reference - , editorial can be found in. variants in PCSK9 and HMGCR genes each may be associated with about 19% relative reduction in risk of myocardial infarction or death from coronary heart disease in cohort study with 112,772 adults ().
_Epidemiology|Associated conditions
70%-80% of patients with CAD have diabetes or abnormal glucose tolerance. based on cohort study. 4,196 patients with CAD (2,107 with acute coronary syndrome [ACS], 2,854 with stable CAD) from 110 centers in 25 countries included. preexisting diabetes present in 32% ACS patients and 30% CAD patients. previously undiagnosed diabetes found in 22% of ACS patients and 14% CAD patients. impaired glucose tolerance seen in 32% ACS patients and 32% CAD patients, about 5% both groups had impaired fasting glucose. overall 70%-80% of all CAD patients had diabetes or impaired glucose metabolism. Reference -. cardiovascular disease independently associated with kidney function decline. based on meta-analysis of individual patient data from cohort studies. pooled analysis of individual patient data from 2 cohort studies (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities [ARIC] study and Cardiovascular Health Study [CHS]) with 13,826 persons. 1,787 persons (12.9%) had cardiovascular disease at baseline. cardiovascular disease associated with increased risk of. kidney function decline. by serum creatinine measurement (odds ratio [OR] 2.29, 95% CI 1.87-2.82). by glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimation (OR 1.28, 95% CI 1.13-1.45). development of kidney disease. by serum creatinine measurement (OR 1.75, 95% CI 1.32-2.32). by GFR estimation (OR 1.54, 95% CI 1.26-1.89). Reference - , editorial can be found in. heart failure common among patients with coronary disease or diabetes in epidemiological study of 1,062 patients with previous MI, angina, hypertension, or diabetes. left ventricular systolic ejection fraction < 40% found in. 22.1% patients with previous MI. 8.1% patients with angina. 1.8% patients with hypertension. 5.8% patients with diabetes. heart failure (defined as dyspnea plus either systolic dysfunction, atrial fibrillation or clinically significant valve disease) found in. 16% patients with previous MI. 8.4% patients with angina. 2.8% patients with hypertension. 7.7% patients with diabetes. Reference -. CAD may be associated with sexual dysfunction. based on cross-sectional study. 550 patients with CAD assessed by hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS) questionnaire and relation and sexuality scale (RSS). depressive symptoms and anxiety more severe in women. scores for sexual frequency, sexual function, and the total relation and sexuality scale significantly higher in women. total relation and sexuality scale associated with depressive symptoms in women (p = 0.03). scores for sexual fear significantly higher in men. being afraid of sexual relation correlated with depressive symptoms only in men and their spouses (p = 0.001). Reference -. depression and CAD associated. patients with CAD have high prevalence of depression. based on 1999 National Health Interview Survey of 30,801 adults. 12-month prevalence of major depression 9.3% in patients with CAD. adjusted odds ratio (adjusted OR) for major depression 2.3 for adults with CAD compared to adults without chronic conditions. Reference -. women with CAD have higher rates of depression compared to men with CAD. based on systematic review. systematic review of 8 observational studies reporting prevalence of depression in 2,072 patients with CAD. prevalence of major depression 18.7% in women vs. 12% in men. compared to men, women with CAD at increased risk for major depression (odds ratio 1.77, 95% CI 1.21-2.58). Reference -. depression and CHD associated. based on prospective population-based health survey. 1,749 adult survey respondents with no history of cardiovascular disease. 152 fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular disease events occurred during 15,514 person-years. depression significantly associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease in analysis adjusted for inflammatory markers and medication use. Reference -. women with depressive symptoms and CAD may have more anxiety than men. based on cohort study. 1,952 patients (35.4% women) with depressive symptoms and CHD from randomized trial included. patients completed questionnaires assessing dysphoric symptoms, perceptions about control related to health, beliefs about cardiac disease, and demographic variables. compared to men, women were older with more hypertension and anxiety but less likely to have had interventions for CAD (p < 0.05). Reference - PROMOTION trial ( ). prevalence of colorectal neoplasm may be elevated in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD). based on cohort study. 621 patients had screening colonoscopy after coronary angiography for suspected CAD. 206 patients had CAD defined as stenosis > 50% in major coronary artery on angiography. 208 patients had suspected CAD with negative angiography. 207 patients were matched controls from general population. comparing CAD-positive patients vs. CAD-negative patients vs. general population controls. prevalence of colorectal neoplasm 34% vs. 18.8% vs. 20.8% (p < 0.001, pairwise comparisons not reported). prevalence of advanced colorectal lesions 18.4% vs. 8.7% vs. 5.8% (p < 0.001, pairwise comparisons not reported). prevalence of cancer 4.4% vs. 0.5% vs. 1.4% (p = 0.02, pairwise comparisons not reported). Reference - , commentary can be found in. 30.5% prevalence of airflow limitation in current or former smokers with ischemic heart disease. based on cross-sectional study. 2,730 patients ≥ 40 years old with ischemic heart disease in outpatient setting who were current or former smokers were evaluated for airflow limitation. airflow limitation defined as postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced volume capacity ratio < 0.7. 30.5% had airflow limitation, of whom 70.6% had no previous spirometry testing or pulmonary disease diagnosis. Reference -. fibrotic lung disease associated with CAD. based on cohort study. 630 patients referred for lung transplantation evaluation included. lung diseases included. nongranulomatous fibrotic disease in 17.9%. granulomatous fibrotic disease in 11.6%. nonfibrotic disease in 70.5%. compared to nonfibrotic disease, nongranulomatous fibrotic lung disease associated with. any CAD (odds ratio [OR] 2.18, 95% CI 1.17-4.06). multivessel CAD (odds ratio 4.16, 95% CI 1.46-11.9). association between fibrotic lung disease and CAD only significant after adjustment for confounding risk factors. Reference -. DynaMed commentary -- The study is not conclusive due to multiple confounding variables. There were no significant findings prior to adjustment for smoking, so results could be related to "over-adjustment" for the smoking risk factor. gallstones associated with CAD. based on cohort study. 473 patients had ultrasound and stress test in Mexico City. 354 patients had gallstones. prevalence of CAD 16% in patients with gallstones vs. 4.5% in patients without gallstones (p < 0.0001). Reference -. panic disorder not associated with CAD in systematic review of 8 studies ( ).
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Causes
atherosclerosis of coronary arteries.
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Pathogenesis|Atherosclerosis
development of atherosclerosis. fatty streak (first grossly visible lesion). begins forming in childhood and adolescence due to accumulation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles in arterial intima. accumulated LDL particles can induce innate inflammatory reaction within intima. inflammation leads to influx of monocytes, lymphocytes, mast cells, and neutrophils into arterial walls, where monocytes mature into macrophages. macrophages engulf lipoprotein particles and become foam cells, which comprise fatty streak. early fibroatheroma. develops during late adolescence and early adulthood due to accumulation of macrophage foam cells, inflammatory cells, and normal arterial cells between endothelial lining and medial arterial wall. in advancing lesions, cell necrosis occurs and leads to further inflammation and progressive distortion of normal intima structure. accumulation of dead and dying cells, as well as extracellular lipids and other cells, leads to formation of a lipid-rich necrotic core. fibrous tissue forms around the necrotic core and under the endothelium, resulting in a fibrous cap. advancing atheroma. occurs in late adulthood. thin-cap fibroatheroma develops due to weakening of fibrous cap at ≥ 1 site. thin caps may rupture and expose thrombogenic interior into vessel lumen. thrombus at high risk of rupturing known as vulnerable plaque. vulnerable plaques, when ruptured, can cause thrombosis and lead to myocardial infarction and stroke. complex lesions. cycles of thin-cap rupture, thrombosis, and healing may occur on 1 lesion and can be clinically silent. calcium deposits can accumulate into large nodules and, if ruptured, become sites for thrombosis. clinical manifestations. increasing size of plaque can lead to significant stenosis and manifest ischemia. thrombosis can lead to total occlusion of major arteries to the heart, brain, legs, and other organs. Reference -. review of the biology of atherosclerosis can be found in.
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Pathogenesis|Endothelial Dysfunction
role of vascular endothelium. vascular endothelium consists of endothelial cell monolayer which lines interior lumen of blood vessels ( ). function of endothelial cells. provides essential role in regulating blood flow and vascular tone. controls movement of fluid and molecules between tissues and blood. provides anticoagulant surface for blood vessel. provides vascular repair and homeostasis. Reference -. vasoactive substances produced by endothelial cells which affect vascular tone and vessel wall remodeling include. endothelium-derived relaxing factors, such as nitric oxide (NO), endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors, and prostacyclin. endothelium-derived constricting factors such as endothelin-1. Reference -. endothelial dysfunction. is characterized by impairment or absence of usual endothelial function, particularly impairment of endothelium-dependent vasodilation, which is considered a distinguishing feature. may cause myocardial ischemia and other effects when present in epicardial and/or microcirculatory coronary arteries. in context of microcirculatory coronary arteries, may play role in pathophysiology of cardiomyopathy, diastolic dysfunction in patients without occlusive coronary artery disease, and takotsubo syndrome. is involved in each phase of atherosclerosis, including. early stages with increased endothelial permeability to lipoproteins and formation of adhesion molecules on endothelium surface, which ultimately leads to accumulation of T cells and monocytes. later stages in which oxidized low-density lipoprotein cholesterol causes vascular endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells to secrete macrophage colony stimulating factor and monocyte chemotactic protein-1, which ultimately leads to fatty streaks and lipid accumulation. Reference -. cardiovascular risk factors (such as smoking, diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, advanced age, hypertension). may impair endothelial function via multiple mechanisms which may include. smooth muscle cell migration and proliferation. thrombotic dysfunction. alteration in vasomotor tone. migration and adhesion of leukocytes. hemodynamic forces (such as shear stress). may exert adverse effects via increased oxidative stress and overproduction of reactive oxygen species. Reference -. endothelial function testing. generally has limited clinical utility in practice. invasive testing. is performed by intra-arterial administration of acetylcholine with subsequent vessel diameter measurement by quantitative coronary angiography and measure of coronary blood flow by Doppler flow wire. in patients with normal endothelial function, acetylcholine administration causes endothelial cells to release nitric oxide, causing vasodilation and increased coronary blood flow. in patients with endothelial dysfunction, acetylcholine administration causes vasoconstriction due to activation of muscarinic receptors in vascular smooth muscle cells, and an absence of increased coronary blood flow. noninvasive testing. forearm flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD) utilizes forearm occlusion with pneumatic pressure cuff which induces reactive hyperemia; brachial artery diameter is evaluated before and after reactive hyperemia. reactive hyperemia-peripheral arterial tonometry (RH-PAT) utilizes probes on 1 finger of each hand in which finger arterial pulse wave amplitude is assessed by plethysmographic recording before and during reactive hyperemia. both FMD and RH-PAT reported to correlate well with coronary artery endothelial function testing; FMD testing represents conduit artery vasodilation and RH-PAT testing represents microvessel vasodilation. Reference -. prevention of endothelial dysfunction. generally consists of management of modifiable major risk factors which may include smoking cessation, weight loss, exercise, and change in diet. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and statins reported to have beneficial effects on endothelial function, though use should be guided by presence of an indication for use (such as hypertension and hypercholesterolemia). Reference -. see for additional information. Cardiovascular Disease Major Risk Factors. Mediterranean Diet.
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Pathogenesis|Coronary Collateral Circulation|Definition and classification
coronary collateral circulation (CCC) provides alternative blood supply to myocardium. consists of. interarterial anastomotic coronary vessels connecting areas supplied by different epicardial coronary arteries. extracardiac anastomoses (also called noncoronary collateral myocardial blood flow [NCCMBF]). originate from arteries that supply pericardium such as bronchial or internal mammary arteries. example is anastomosis connecting internal mammary artery to right coronary artery through pericardiacophrenic branch and sinus node artery. functions as natural counterpart to surgical bypasses by bridging severe stenoses. Reference -. classification systems include. by anatomy. septal collaterals. intra-arterial collaterals. epicardial with proximal take-off. epicardial with distal take-off. by collateral flow index (CFI). low collateralization if CFI < 0.25. high collateralization if CFI ≥ 0.25. by Rentrop filling grade. grade 0 - no visible collateral filling. grade 1 - filling of side branches of occluded artery but no visualization of epicardial segment. grade 2 - partial filling of epicardial vessel segment. grade 3 - complete filling of epicardial vessel segment. by collateral connection diameter. CC0 - no continuous connection. CC1 - continuous connection with diameter ≤ 0.3 mm. CC2 - continuous, small, side-branch-like size of collateral throughout with diameter ≥ 0.4 mm. Reference -.
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Pathogenesis|Coronary Collateral Circulation|Pathophysiology and determinants
collaterals may form due to. leftover collaterals. during embryogenesis, dense vascular network with multiple anastomoses are formed due to vasculogenesis. density of vascular network decreases after neonatal period by physiological recession (pruning). collaterals may partially persist to form CCC. leftover collateral vessels typically 10-200 micrometers in diameter. recruitment/promotion as a result from arteriogenesis. typically results from changing vascular pressure and resistance conditions. often seen during course of coronary artery disease (CAD) when pressure gradient develops across stenosis. collateral circulation most prevalent in chronic total occlusions. collateral vessels in CAD typically 100-800 micrometers in diameter. Reference -. CCC may occur in up to 20% of adults without stenotic CAD ( ). determinants of CCC. in patients without CAD, reported determinants include. genetic factors. ACTN1 (integrin pathway). FGF13 (angiogenesis pathway). RPS6KA3 (platelet-derived growth factor pathway). in adulthood. bradycardia. absence of arterial hypertension. in patents with CAD, reported determinants include. increased stenosis severity. longer angina duration. absence of nitrate use. proximal lesion location. Reference -. changes over time in CCC. in adults without CAD, CCC typically regresses with age. in adults with CAD. collateral circulation may be formed due to formation of stenosis. collateral circulation may decrease due to. reestablishing antegrade flow in recipient artery, which induces derecruitment of collateral vessels. diversion of blood flow towards adjacent coronary beds (coronary steal). reduction in systemic arterial pressure. Reference -.
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Pathogenesis|Coronary Collateral Circulation|Clinical significance and evaluation
benefits of CCC may include. reduction of infarction size. preservation of ventricular function after myocardial infarction. prevention of ventricular remodeling. reduction of aneurysmal dilation. Reference -. evaluation of CCC. qualitative evaluation may be performed using coronary angiography using Rentrop scale. grade 0 - no visible collateral filling. grade 1 - filling of side branches of occluded artery but no dye reaching epicardial segment. grade 2 - partial filling of epicardial vessel. grade 3 - complete filling of epicardial vessel segment. quantitative evaluation typically performed using CFI. CFI defined as (mean coronary occlusive pressure - central venous pressure)/(aortic pressure - central venous pressure). measured during 1-minute proximal coronary balloon occlusion pressure measurements. for evaluation in chronic total occlusion that cannot be crossed with wire, noninvasive evaluation may be performed using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. References - ,. high coronary collateralization may be associated with reduced all-cause mortality compared to low coronary collateralization in patients with acute or stable CAD. based on systematic review of observational studies. systematic review of 12 prospective cohort studies evaluating association of CCC with mortality in 6,529 patients with acute or stable CAD. setting was acute myocardial infarction in 5 studies, stable CAD in 5 studies, and subacute myocardial infarction in 2 studies. definition of high collateralization was Rentrop grade > 1 in 7 studies, Rentrop grade > 0 in 4 studies, and CFI ≥ 0.25 in 1 study. follow-up varied from in-hospital follow-up to 120 months. comparing high to low collateralization. high collateralization associated with reduced all-cause mortality (risk ratio [RR] 0.64, 95% CI 0.45-0.91) in analysis of 12 studies with 6,529 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. in subgroup analyses by setting. high collateralization associated with reduced all-cause mortality in patients with stable CAD (RR 0.59, 95% CI 0.39-0.89) in analysis of 5 studies with 2,265 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. no significant differences in patients with. subacute myocardial infarction in analysis of 2 studies with 2,193 patients. acute myocardial infarction in analysis of 5 studies with 2,071 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. in subgroup analyses by use of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), high collateralization associated with. reduced all-cause mortality in patients having PCI (RR 0.42, 95% CI 0.32-0.56) in analysis of 6 studies with 3,340 patients. reduced all-cause mortality in patients not having PCI (RR 0.7, 95% CI 0.51-0.97) in analysis of 4 studies with 594 patients. Reference -.
_Etiology and Pathogenesis|Pathogenesis|Coronary Collateral Circulation|Potential therapies to promote coronary collateral growth
therapies proposed to promote CCC include. approaches to promote arteriogenesis (outward remodeling of preexisting anastomoses) by increasing vascular shear stress by. physical exercise. external counterpulsation. coronary sinus reducer. ivabradine to induce bradycardia. activation or recruitment of monocytes. multiple chemokines and cytokines proposed. granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). fibroblast growth factor. vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). may carry risk of harmful effects due to common mechanisms with inflammatory disease. Reference -. high-intensity and moderate-intensity exercise for 4 weeks associated with increase in CFI in patients with CAD (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). based on small randomized trial without clinical outcomes. 60 adults (median age 64 years) with significant CAD (fractional flow reserve ≤ 0.75) were randomized to high-intensity exercise vs. moderate-intensity exercise vs. control for 4 weeks. high-intensity exercise consisted of 30 minutes of supervised training at 70%-95% of ischemia/angina-free capacity 4 times/day and 5 days/week. moderate-intensity exercise consisted of 20 minutes of supervised training at maximum 60% of ischemia/angina-free capacity 6-8 times/day. control group encouraged to exercise 20-30 minutes for 2-3 sessions per week. primary endpoint was change in CFI. increase in CFI. 39.4% with high-intensity exercise (p = 0.005 with control). 41.3% with moderate-intensity exercise (p = 0.004 with control). 0.7% in control group. no significant difference between high-intensity and moderate-intensity group. Reference - EXCITE trial (). ivabradine associated with increase in CFI in patients with stable CAD (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). based on small randomized trial without clinical outcomes. 46 adults (mean age 64 years, 88% male) with stable CAD were randomized to ivabradine vs. placebo for 6 months. ivabradine started at 5 mg/day and titrated to resting heart rate reduction to 60 beats/minute (maximal dose 7.5 mg/day). patients in ivabradine group had significantly smaller stenosis compared to placebo group (54% of diameter vs. 76% of diameter, p = 0.0075). primary endpoint was change in CFI. comparing ivabradine vs. placebo. change in mean CFI +0.04 vs. -0.031 (p = 0.0113). change in mean heart rate -8.1 beats/minute vs. +0.2 beats/minute (p = 0.0089). Reference -.
_History and Physical|History|Chief concern (CC)
substernal pressure-type angina. other presenting symptoms may include. dyspnea. nausea. diaphoresis. possible. left arm, jaw, or neck pain. upper abdominal/epigastric discomfort. with acute chest pain, if suspicion of unstable angina or acute myocardial infarction (AMI) see Acute coronary syndromes or ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
_History and Physical|History|History of present illness (HPI)
obtain detailed history of chest pain or chest discomfort, including. quality, location, severity, and duration of chest pain. radiation of pain to other body parts. inducing and alleviating factors. pain typically substernal but may be felt in areas between epigastrium and mandible, or upper appendages. may be described as. tightness. heaviness. squeezing. pressure sensation. grip-like. suffocating. duration typically < 10 minutes. may be provoked by. exertion. emotional stress. cold weather. heavy meals. unaltered by changing position or respiration. pain classification. 3 characteristics of pain typical with angina. substernal chest discomfort with characteristic quality and duration. provoked by exertion or emotional stress. relieved by rest or nitroglycerin. interpretation. if all 3 characteristics - angina. if 2 characteristics - atypical angina. if 0 or 1 characteristics - nonanginal pain. women more likely than men to present with atypical symptoms, such as. fatigue. abdominal pain. nausea. vomiting. dyspepsia. sharp chest pain. women typically have longer time from symptom onset to presentation and diagnosis compared to men. estimating pretest likelihood of CAD. in symptomatic patients |Table 1. Pretest Likelihood of CAD Patient Age | Typical Angina | Atypical Angina | Nonanginal Chest Pain | 30-39 years | 26% for women. 76% for men. | 12% for women. 34% for men. | 2% for women. 4% for men. | 40-49 years | 55% for women. 87% for men. | 22% for women. 51% for men. | 3% for women. 13% for men. | 50-59 years | 73% for women. 93% for men. | 31% for women. 65% for men. | 7% for women. 20% for men. | 60-69 years | 86% for women. 94% for men. | 51% for women. 72% for men. | 14% for women. 27% for men. | |Table 2. Pretest Likelihood of CAD in Patients without Diabetes Mellitus, Smoking, or Hyperlipidemia Patient Age | Typical Angina | Atypical Angina | Nonanginal Chest Pain | 35 years | 10% for women. 30% for men. | 2% for women. 8% for men. | 1% for women. 3% for men. | 45 years | 20% for women. 51% for men. | 5% for women. 21% for men. | 2% for women. 9% for men. | 55 years | 38% for women. 80% for men. | 10% for women. 45% for men. | 4% for women. 23% for men. | 65 years | 56% for women. 93% for men. | 20% for women. 71% for men. | 9% for women. 49% for men. | |Table 3. Pretest Likelihood of CAD in Patients with Diabetes Mellitus, Smoking, or Hyperlipidemia Patient Age | Typical Angina | Atypical Angina | Nonanginal Chest Pain | 35 years | 78% for women. 88% for men. | 39% for women. 59% for men. | 19% for women. 35% for men. | 45 years | 79% for women. 92% for men. | 43% for women. 70% for men. | 22% for women. 47% for men. | 55 years | 82% for women. 95% for men. | 47% for women. 79% for men. | 21% for women. 59% for men. | 65 years | 84% for women. 97% for men. | 51% for women. 86% for men. | 29% for women. 69% for men. |.
_History and Physical|History|Medication history
ask about oral contraceptive use, particularly in women who smoke ( ).
_History and Physical|History|Past medical history (PMH)
ask about likely risk factors, such as. cerebrovascular disease. peripheral artery disease. dyslipidemia. hypertension. diabetes. obesity. metabolic syndrome. ask about new-onset or recurrent angina. self-reported history of cardiovascular disease and risk factors may be inaccurate, based on comparing questionnaires with medical records in 26,162 patients (), commentary can be found in.
_History and Physical|History|Family history (FH)
ask about family history of premature CAD. parental history of heart attack before age 55 is reasonably accurate in study of 791 men who were offspring of parents in Framingham study (). premature cardiovascular disease (before age 55) more common in patients with family history of premature peripheral vascular disease or premature CAD, in study of 148 subjects ( ).
_History and Physical|History|Social history (SH)
ask about tobacco use, level of physical activity, history of cocaine use.
_History and Physical|Physical|General physical
often normal or unremarkable but findings may suggest alternative causes of chest pain. measure blood pressure and weight. elevated blood pressure suggests presence of risk factors.
_History and Physical|Physical|Skin
xanthomas suggest presence of risk factors.
_History and Physical|Physical|HEENT
retinal exudates suggest presence of risk factors.
_History and Physical|Physical|Neck
jugular vein distension may suggest heart failure.
_History and Physical|Physical|Chest
pain on palpation may suggest nonischemic cause, such as musculoskeletal disease.
_History and Physical|Physical|Cardiac
findings during auscultation may include. systolic murmurs suggesting aortic stenosis, mitral regurgitation, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. extra heart sounds (S3 or S4) due to left ventricular dysfunction. carotid bruits or diminished distal pulses suggesting peripheral artery disease. audible rub suggests pericardial or pleural disease.
_History and Physical|Physical|Lungs
listen for pulmonary rales suggestive of heart failure.
_History and Physical|Physical|Abdomen
palpable abdominal aneurysm suggests vascular disease.
_History and Physical|Physical|Extremities
presence of lower extremity edema suggests heart failure. decreased pedal pulses suggests vascular disease.
_Diagnosis|Making the diagnosis
with acute chest pain, if suspicion of unstable angina or acute myocardial infarction (AMI) see Acute coronary syndromes or ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). CAD presumed based on pretest likelihood probability using combination of symptoms, risk factors, and noninvasive testing, including. typical anginal symptoms in high risk patient. atypical symptoms, or typical symptoms in intermediate risk patient, with positive cardiac stress test. CAD established if either. history of myocardial infarction or acute coronary syndrome. presence of obstructive lesions on angiographic imaging.
_Diagnosis|Differential diagnosis
nonatherosclerotic CAD - often manifests as coronary artery aneurysms. collagen vascular disease. Kawasaki disease. Takayasu arteritis. Polyarteritis nodosa. systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. infectious diseases. Lyme disease. septic emboli. syphilis (tertiary phase). congenital. iatrogenic. Reference -.
_Diagnosis|Testing overview
electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated in all patients with chest pain (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). cardiac stress testing recommended if suspected CAD for diagnosis and based on risk assessment. exercise ECG testing is preferred test in patients able to exercise with intermediate pretest probability of CAD and interpretable ECG (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A ). pharmacological alternatives to exercise for stress testing include vasodilators (adenosine, dipyridamole, regadenoson) and cardiac stimulants (dobutamine). nuclear cardiac imaging (myocardial perfusion imaging) or echocardiography may be added to exercise or pharmacologic stress testing to improve accuracy in specific clinical situations. coronary angiography for definitive diagnosis if not confirmed by cardiac stress testing. other noninvasive testing methods for diagnosis of CAD and risk stratification. consider computed tomography for patients with low-to-intermediate pretest probability of CAD, such as. cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). noncontrast cardiac CT to determine coronary artery calcium (CAC) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). perform cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging in patients with known stable CAD being considered for revascularization due to coronary stenosis of unknown physiological significance (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). measure left ventricular function by. resting echocardiography (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). radionuclide angiography (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). blood tests may provide useful information for diagnosis of CAD or comorbidities.
_Diagnosis|Clinical prediction rules
negative result on simple clinical prediction rule helps rule out coronary artery disease in patients with heart failure of unclear etiology (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study with independent derivation and validation cohorts. derivation cohort included 124 consecutive patients with primary diagnosis of heart failure with unclear etiology (ejection fraction < 50%) who had coronary angiography and validation cohort included 143 similar patients. coronary artery disease (CAD) defined as ≥ 50% stenosis in any major vessel and severe CAD defined as CAD in left main coronary artery, in 3 vessels, or in 2 vessels if including proximal left anterior descending artery. prevalence of CAD. any CAD in 26% of derivation cohort and 36% of validation cohort. severe CAD in 15% of derivation cohort and 17% of validation cohort. simple clinical rule predicted CAD if any of the following were present. diabetes mellitus. Q-wave or left bundle branch block. ≥ 2 nondiabetes risk factors including. age ≥ 55 years in men or age ≥ 65 years in women. hypertension. tobacco use. dyslipidemia. diagnostic performance of simple clinical prediction rule in validation cohort. for any CAD, sensitivity 98% and specificity 18%. for severe CAD, sensitivity 100% and specificity 15%. Reference -. European Society of Cardiology recommended CAD consortium models may have better discrimination for predicting obstructive CAD compared to Diamond-Forrester model in adults with suspected CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on retrospective cohort study. 2,274 adults (mean age 56 years) without prior CAD who were referred for clinically indicated coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA) for suspected CAD were evaluated for obstructive CAD (≥ 50% stenosis). 2 CAD consortium models recommended by European Society of Cardiology were used to calculate scores to evaluate obstructive CAD. CAD consortium basic model uses age, sex, and chest pain type. CAD consortium clinical model uses age, sex, and chest pain type plus clinical factors including diabetes mellitus, smoking status, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Diamond-Forrester score for prediction of obstructive CAD (using chest pain type, sex, and age) was also calculated. based on scores, patients were classified as having low (< 5%), intermediate (5%-70%), or high (> 70%) pretest probability of obstructive CAD. 501 patients (22%) had obstructive CAD by CCTA. low pretest probability (no additional testing required) in. 24.6% based on CAD consortium basic model. 30% based on CAD consortium clinical model. 8.3% based on Diamond-Forrester model (p < 0.001 vs. either CAD consortium model). high pretest probability in 18% using Diamond-Forrester model vs. 1.1% using either CAD model (p < 0.001). Reference -. prediction model for risk of obstructive coronary artery disease (≥ 70% stenosis in ≥ 1 major coronary vessel) derived in 649 patients using clinical markers (male sex and previous percutaneous coronary intervention) and 4 biomarkers (midkine, adiponectin, apolipoprotein C-I, and kidney injury molecule-1) and validated in 278 patients can be found in.
_Diagnosis|Blood tests
blood tests may provide useful information for diagnosis of CAD or comorbidities, including. complete lipid profile. assessment of glycemic control with fasting glucose or HbA1c. hemoglobin. white blood cell count. serum creatinine measurement. lipid subfractions. small, dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL). Apo A. Apo B. brain natriuretic peptide. C-reactive protein. high-sensitivity CRP levels independently predict risk of cardiovascular disease. CRP levels not shown to be clinically useful in most patients. CRP levels possibly useful in patients with intermediate risk of coronary heart disease in whom further risk assessment would affect evaluation and therapy for primary prevention. repeat testing may be necessary due to variation over time. see C-reactive Protein (CRP) as Cardiac Risk Factor for details. consider screening adults with cardiovascular disease for chronic kidney disease using (AHA Class IIa, Level C). Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation to estimate glomerular filtration rate; abnormal values are < 60 mL/minute per 1.73 m of body surface area (AHA Class I, Level B) (see DynaMed calculator for ). albumin-to-creatinine ratio; abnormal ratios are > 30 mg albumin/1 g creatinine (AHA Class IIa, Level B). Reference -. blood-based gene expression score does not appear to be clinically useful for diagnosing CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on independent derivation and validation cohorts with nonstandard reference for CAD diagnosis. 1,343 patients without diabetes who had a clinical indication for coronary angiography (history of chest pain, suspected angina, or high risk for CAD) had blood samples collected prior to angiography and were divided into derivation (694 patients) and validation (649 patients) cohorts. patients excluded for previous myocardial infarction (MI), revascularization, or obstructive CAD. obstructive CAD defined as stenosis ≥ 50% on quantitative coronary angiography (reference standard) (corresponds to 60%-70% stenosis on clinical angiography). blood-based gene expression algorithm score (40-point scale) was developed to diagnose CAD using 23 genes and sex-specific age functions. obstructive CAD in 36% of 640 patients from derivation cohort and 36.5% of 526 patients in validation cohort. predictive performance of gene expression score (cutoff 14.75 points) to detect CAD in validation cohort. sensitivity 85%. specificity 43%. positive predictive value 46%. negative predictive value 83%. addition of gene expression score to clinical diagnostic model using 11 risk factors was not associated with significant improvement in diagnostic performance. Reference - , editorial can be found in.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI)|Stress nuclear MPI
exercise or pharmacological stress testing with nuclear MPI indicated for select patients with suspected CAD or for risk assessment in patients with known CAD - see Cardiac stress testing for information.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI)|Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
SPECT may have moderate sensitivity and limited specificity for detecting obstructive coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review without assessment of study quality. systematic review of 114 studies of single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) for diagnosis of obstructive coronary artery disease. reference standard was invasive coronary angiography. pooled diagnostic performance of SPECT in per-patient analyses from 106 studies. sensitivity 88%. specificity 61%. Reference -. SPECT may not help diagnose coronary artery disease in patients with end-stage liver disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study with unclear blinding. 414 patients with end-stage liver disease assessed for clinical risk factors and had SPECT and coronary angiography (reference standard) for diagnosis of coronary artery disease. vasodilating agent in SPECT was adenosine or regadenoson. clinical risk factors were age ≥ 60 years, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking, and family history of coronary artery disease. 16.9% had coronary artery disease (> 50% stenosis) and 13.3% had severe coronary artery disease (> 70% stenosis) by coronary angiography. for detection of coronary artery disease. SPECT with adenosine as vasodilating agent had sensitivity 54% and specificity 82%. SPECT with regadenoson as vasodilating agent had sensitivity 35% and specificity 88%. diagnostic performance for detection of severe coronary artery disease was similar for both vasodilating agents. no significant differences in diagnostic performance between SPECT and risk score based on clinical risk factors. Reference -. SPECT may be most cost-effective functional cardiac test. based on randomized trial. 898 patients with suspected or known CAD and exercise test result requiring nonurgent angiography were randomized to 1 of 4 diagnostic strategies. angiography. SPECT. magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). stress echocardiography. follow-up for 18 months |Table 4. Outcomes for 4 Diagnostic Strategies Outcome | Angiography | SPECT | MRI | Echocardiography | Successful completion of initial test with unequivocal result | 98% | 94% | 78% | 90% | Avoidance of angiography | 0% | 22% | 20% | 25% | Angiography confirmation of positive result | NA | 83% | 89% | 84% | Positive angiography after negative result (false negative) | NA | 31% | 52% | 48% | CABG surgery | 10% | 13% | 11% | 13% | PCI | 25% | 18% | 23% | 23% | Abbreviations: CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NA, not applicable; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; SPECT, single photon emission computed tomography. |. stress echocardiography group had more admissions for chest pain. Reference - CECaT trial ( PDF). repeating SPECT imaging within 4 years has low yield if normal or low risk results on initial SPECT. based on case series. 285 patients with coronary artery calcium score > 0 and low-to-normal risk on initial stress SPECT included. 69 patients had ≥ 1 repeated SPECT within 4 years. 4 patients (6%) had substantial progression on repeat SPECT, only in patients with coronary artery calcium score > 100. 95% 5-year survival free of revascularization. no deaths or myocardial infarctions reported. Reference - , editorial can be found in. SPECT-myocardial perfusion imaging associated with reduced invasive coronary angiography referral and reduced revascularization compared to coronary computed tomographic angiography in patients with suspected stable coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review of trials without blinding of care givers and patients. systematic review of 30 trials and network meta-analysis evaluating non-invasive diagnostic modalities in patients presenting with symptoms suggestive of stable coronary artery disease (12 trials with 22,062 patients) or low risk acute coronary syndrome (18 trials with 11,329 patients). diagnostic modalities included. functional tests. exercise electrocardiogram (ECG). stress echocardiography. SPECT-myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI). anatomical tests. real time myocardial contrast echocardiography (RTMCE). coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA) (noninvasive). cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR). compared to CCTA in network meta-analyses including indirect comparisons in patients with stable coronary artery disease,. reduced referral for invasive coronary angiography associated with SPECT-MPI (OR 0.54, 95% CI 0.3-0.98). reduced revascularization associated with SPECT-MPI (OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.37-0.87). nonsignificant reduction in revascularization associated with exercise ECG (OR 0.63, 95% CI 0.38-1.04). increased downstream testing (invasive or noninvasive) associated with exercise ECG (OR 3.87, 95% CI 2.33-6.41). decreased downstream testing associated with. stress echocardiography (OR 0.24, 95% CI 0.08-0.74). SPECT-MPI (OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.37-0.87). no significant differences in death or myocardial infarction for any diagnostic modality, but CIs include possibility of benefit or harm. Reference -.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI)|Positron emission tomography (PET)
PET may have moderate sensitivity and specificity for detecting obstructive coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review without assessment of study quality. systematic review of 15 studies of positron emission tomography (PET) perfusion imaging for diagnosis of obstructive coronary artery disease. reference standard was invasive coronary angiography. pooled diagnostic performance of PET in per-patient analyses from 11 studies. sensitivity 84%. specificity 81%. Reference -. cardiac PET/CT hybrid scan has higher specificity than either imaging alone for detecting CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study. 107 consecutive patients with intermediate pretest likelihood of CAD had hybrid PET/CT followed by invasive coronary angiography within 2 weeks. stenosis ≥ 50% detected in 41% of patients by invasive angiography with measurement of fractional flow (reference standard). diagnostic performance of imaging modalities for detection of CAD in per-patient analysis. CT alone. sensitivity 95%. specificity 87%. PET alone. sensitivity 95%. specificity 91%. hybrid PET/CT. sensitivity 95%. specificity 100%. Reference -. 18F-sodium fluoride positron emission tomography-computed tomography may identify and localize culprit plaques in patients with acute myocardial infarction and high-risk coronary plaques in patients with stable angina. based on cohort study in 40 patients with acute myocardial infarction (with or without ST-segment elevation) and 40 patients with stable angina. Reference - , editorial can be found.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Computed tomography (CT)
in patients with suspected CAD. consider coronary CT angiography (CCTA) in patients with suspected CAD and. low-to-intermediate pretest probability of CAD who are unable to exercise (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). intermediate pretest probability of CAD who are able to exercise (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). intermediate pretest probability of CAD and any of (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). continued symptoms with prior normal test. inconclusive exercise or pharmacological stress test. unable to have stress test with nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) or echocardiography. efficacy for clinical outcomes. CCTA and functional testing associated with similar mortality and cardiac hospitalization, but CCTA may increase incidence of revascularization and new prescription of aspirin and statin in patients with stable chest pain (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). diagnostic performance for detecting significant CAD. 64-slice CT angiography appears highly sensitive for ruling out significant CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). 64-slice CT angiography rules out CAD in patients with low and intermediate risk of CAD based on Duke Clinical score (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). CCTA may help rule out significant CAD in patients with valvular heart disease undergoing preoperative assessment for cardiac valve surgery (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). coronary artery calcium (CAC) score. CAC scoring indications in patients with symptoms suggestive of CAD are based on pretest probably for CAD. CAC scoring indications in asymptomatic patients are based on global CAD risk. absence of coronary artery calcification (CAC score 0) may not rule out significant obstructive stenosis (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). increased CAC score associated with increased of coronary events in population-based cohort studies. see Computed tomography (CT) for coronary artery disease for details.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)|Stress magnetic resonance imaging
exercise or pharmacological stress testing with cardiac magnetic resonance imaging indicated for select patients with suspected CAD or for risk assessment in patients with known CAD - see Cardiac stress testing for information. gadolinium-free CMR stress T1 mapping may detect and distinguish between obstructive CAD and microvascular disfunction in patients with stable angina. based on diagnostic cohort study without independent validation. 60 patients (mean age 60 years) with stable angina and suspected CAD had gadolinium-free CMR (1.5 or 3 Tesla) with adenosine stress/rest T1 mapping and perfusion assessment followed by late gadolinium enhancement imaging. reference standard was invasive coronary angiography and physiology assessments ≤ 7 days after CMR. obstructive CAD defined by fractional flow reserve (FFR) < 0.8. microvascular dysfunction defined by FFR ≥ 0.8 plus index of microcirculatory resistance (IMR) ≥ 25 mm Hg/second. 125 non-infarcted coronary artery territories were included in analysis reference standard results in per-territory analysis. obstructive CAD in 33% (in 34 patients). microvascular dysfunction in 28% (in 24 patients). cutoffs for CMR stress T1 mapping (difference between stress and rest values, ΔT1) were determined by receiver operating curve analysis. for obstructive CAD, ΔT1 < 1.5%. for microvascular dysfunction, ΔT1 ≥ 1.5% and ≤ 4%. diagnostic performance of gadolinium-free CMR stress T1 mapping in per-territory analysis. for detection of obstructive CAD. sensitivity 93%. specificity 95%. positive predictive value 91%. negative predictive value 96%. for detection of microvascular dysfunction. sensitivity 94%. specificity 94%. positive predictive value 92%. negative predictive value 96%. Reference -.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)|Detection of coronary arterial stenosis
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance recommends against performing coronary cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) in. the initial evaluation of asymptomatic patients. symptomatic patients with a history of coronary stents. Reference - Choosing Wisely 2014 Jan 16. cardiac magnetic resonance may have moderate sensitivity and specificity for detecting obstructive CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review without assessment of study quality. systematic review of 37 studies of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) for diagnosis of obstructive CAD. reference standard was invasive coronary angiography. pooled diagnostic performance of CMR in per-patient analyses from 27 studies. sensitivity 89%. specificity 76%. Reference -. coronary magnetic resonance angiography appears to have moderate sensitivity and specificity for CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review with heterogeneity. systematic review of 39 studies of coronary magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) for detection of CAD. reference standard was conventional angiography. pooled diagnostic performance of MRA for detection of CAD. overall in 25 studies with 933 patients and 4,620 segments. sensitivity 73%. specificity 86%. in patient-level analyses of 13 studies with 607 patients. sensitivity 88%. specificity 56%. in vessel-level analyses in 16 studies with 2,041 vessels. sensitivity 75%. specificity 85%. Reference -. magnetic resonance perfusion helps detect and rule out CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on systematic review of diagnostic cohort studies. systematic review of 14 diagnostic cohort studies evaluating magnetic resonance (MR) perfusion for diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD) in 650 adults. pooled prevalence of CAD was 45.7% (range 25.3%-73.3%) by fractional flow reserve (reference standard in all studies). pooled performance of MR perfusion for diagnosis of CAD in analysis of 8 studies with 755 patients. sensitivity 90% (95% CI 86%-93%). specificity 87% (95% CI 82%-90%). positive likelihood ratio 6.7 (95% CI 5.06-8.87). negative likelihood ratio 0.12 (95% CI 0.08-0.16). assuming prevalence of 45.7%, MR perfusion would have positive predictive value 85% and negative predictive value 91%. Reference - , editorial can be found in. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance may have a better diagnostic performance than SPECT for the diagnosis of CAD. multiparametric cardiovascular magnetic resonance is more sensitive than SPECT for diagnosis of CAD in patients with suspected angina (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study. 752 patients with suspected angina pectoris and ≥ 1 cardiovascular risk factor had multiparametric cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging and SPECT in random order. multiparametric CMR imaging included. rest and adenosine stress perfusion. cine imaging. late gadolinium enhancement. magnetic resonance coronary angiography. reference standard was x-ray angiography. 628 patients (83.5%) had results available for all 3 tests. 283 (39%) of 726 patients who had x-ray angiography had significant coronary heart disease |Table 5. Diagnostic Performance of Multiparametric CMR and SPECT for Coronary Heart Disease | Multiparametric CMR | SPECT | Sensitivity | 86.5% (95% CI) (81.8%-90.1%) | 66.5% (95% CI) (60.4%-72.1%) | Specificity | 83.4% (95% CI) (79.5%-86.7%) | 82.6% (95% CI) (78.5%-86.1%) | Positive predictive value | 77.2% (95% CI) (72.1%-81.6%) | 71.4% (95% CI) (65.3%-76.9%) | Negative predictive value | 90.5% (95% CI) (87.1%-93%) | 79.1% (95% CI) (74.8%-82.8%) | Abbreviations: CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography. |. Reference - CE-MARC trial ( ), editorial can be found at. CMR may have higher diagnostic performance than SPECT for diagnosis of CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study without application of all tests to all patients. 515 patients (mean age 60 years, 73.2% male) with suspected coronary artery disease (CAD) received contrast medium. 94.4% had perfusion-CMR. 96.3% had SPECT. CAD defined as ≥ 50% stenosis in ≥ 1 coronary vessel with diameter ≥ 2 mm on x-ray coronary angiography (reference standard). CAD diagnosed in 227 patients (48.8%) of 465 patients who had results available for all 3 tests. 40 of 465 patients excluded for poor image quality on perfusion-CMR and/or SPECT. in receiver operating characteristic analysis, perfusion-CMR had significantly better diagnostic performance than SPECT (p < 0.0004). sensitivities and specificities of perfusion-CMR and SPECT not reported. Reference - MR-IMPACT II trial (). perfusion-CMR might be more accurate than SPECT for detection of CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study with variations in SPECT technique (and selection bias). 241 patients referred for coronary x-ray angiography or SPECT were given SPECT, perfusion-CMR and conventional angiography in order of convenience. patients were randomized to 1 of 5 doses of Gd-DTPA-BMA (Omniscan) for perfusion-CMR with adenosine 0.42 mg/kg and rest perfusion. receiver operating characteristic analysis found. perfusion-CMR not significantly better than SPECT in 42 patients given optimal (0.1 mmol/kg) dose. perfusion-CMR significantly better than SPECT in overall analysis. overall sensitivity and specificity not reported. Reference -. DynaMed commentary -- Dose selection for analysis provided bias toward a better performance with perfusion-CMR. steady-state free-precession myocardial perfusion MRI detects most coronary artery lesions with ≥ 50% stenosis (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study. 228 consecutive patients (mean age 61 years, 79% male) referred for cardiac catheterization had steady-state free-precession myocardial perfusion MRI (1.5 Tesla) within 4 weeks of catheterization. 59 patients referred for primary diagnosis of CAD. 169 patients referred for suspected progress of CAD. patients excluded for previous coronary artery bypass. reference standard was cardiac catheterization findings. stenosis ≥ 50% in at least 1 artery in. 30.5% of primary group. 91.1% of suspected progress group. MRI visually analyzed for evidence of stress-induced hypoperfusion to indicate stenosis. diagnostic performance of MRI in per-patient analysis, comparing primary diagnosis vs. suspected progression groups. sensitivity 83.3% vs.94.2%. specificity 82.9% vs. 93.3%. positive predictive value (PPV) 68.2% vs. 99.3%. negative predictive value (NPV) 91.9% vs. 60.9%. diagnostic performance for all patients of MRI for ≥ 50% stenosis in per-territory analysis. sensitivity 69.3%. specificity 95.5%. PPV 91.9%. NPV 80.8%. Reference -. myocardial perfusion MRI using 3-Tesla whole-body imager can help identify location of coronary artery stenosis (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study. 101 patients (mean age 62 years) with suspected or known cardiovascular disease had myocardial perfusion MRI with 3-Tesla whole-body imager and coronary angiography (reference standard). 70 (69%) patients had ≥ 50% stenosis of 1 or more coronary artery on coronary angiography. 29 patients (41%) had stenosis in the left anterior descending artery. 16 patients (23%) had stenosis in the left circumflex artery. 25 patients (36%) had stenosis in the right coronary artery |Table 6. Detection of Coronary Artery Stenosis with Myocardial Perfusion MRI | Sensitivity | Specificity | PPV | NPV | Patient | 90% | 71% | 88% | 76% | LAD | 83% | 86% | 71% | 93% | LCX | 75% | 91% | 60% | 95% | RCA | 68% | 91% | 71% | 90% | Abbreviations: LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; LCX, left circumflex coronary artery; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NPV, negative predictive value; PPV, positive predictive value; RCA, right coronary artery. |. high agreement among evaluators in determination of myocardial perfusion deficits (kappa 0.79) among 40 randomly selected patients. Reference -. similar results in cohort of 69 patients with suspected cardiovascular disease ( ). diagnostic algorithm combining coronary MRA and perfusion-CMR imaging may diagnose and rule out CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study with possible selection bias. 144 patients (mean age 63 years) with suspected or known CAD and with regular breathing had coronary MRA for detection of coronary artery stenosis. of 96 patients with successful MRA scan, 59 patients also had perfusion-CMR in same imaging session. novel interpretation algorithm was used to combine results of coronary MRA and perfusion-CMR. exclude CAD if. normal perfusion-CMR. probably normal or probably abnormal perfusion-CMR plus stenosis < 50% on coronary MRA. diagnose CAD if. abnormal perfusion-CMR. probably normal or probably abnormal perfusion-CMR plus stenosis < 50% on coronary MRA. CAD defined as ≥ 50% stenosis in ≥ 1 coronary segment with diameter ≥ 1.5 mm on x-ray coronary angiography (reference standard). prevalence of CAD 39% by reference standard. diagnostic performance of combined coronary MRA and perfusion-CMR for detection of CAD. sensitivity 96%. specificity 89%. positive predictive value 84.6%. negative predictive value 97%. positive likelihood ratio 8.7. negative likelihood ratio 0.04. specificity and positive predictive value of algorithm were significantly higher than CE-MARC diagnostic criteria for combination of perfusion-CMR and coronary MRA. Reference -. transmural perfusion gradient and transmural perfusion gradient reserve on cardiac magnetic resonance may help diagnose CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study without validation. 71 patients (mean age 60 years, 80% men) with known or suspected CAD were assessed by transmural perfusion gradient and transmural perfusion gradient reserve on cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) for diagnosis of significant CAD. CMR performed at rest and after adenosine-induced stress. prevalence of significant CAD was 54.9%. 45.1% had fractional flow reserve (FFR) ≤ 0.75 on invasive coronary angiography (reference standard). 9.8% had total/subtotal lesion occlusion or severely calcified arteries unsuitable for FFR measurement. for diagnosis of significant CAD in per-vessel analysis with 213 arteries. transmural perfusion gradient with optimal cutoff ≤ 0.85 had. sensitivity 74.6%. specificity 83.7%. transmural perfusion gradient reserve with optimal cutoff ≤ 0.81 had. sensitivity 90.9%. specificity 83.7%. transmural perfusion gradient reserve had significantly better diagnostic performance than transmural perfusion gradient (assessed by area under receiver operator characteristic curve). Reference -. quantitative magnetic resonance. quantitative assessment of CMR may have similar performance to qualitative analysis for detection of CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study without application of all tests to all patients. 41 patients with abnormal nuclear stress tests scheduled for x-ray angiography had dual-bolus adenosine cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging, analyzed by measuring perfusion reserve (PR) or qualitative interpretation (QI). 30 patients had both PR and QI analysis. prevalence of significant CAD 71% by coronary angiography (reference standard). comparing diagnostic performance of PR vs. QI. for detection of coronary artery stenosis > 50%. sensitivity 88% vs. 79%. specificity 67% vs. 90%. for detection of coronary artery stenosis > 70%. sensitivity 78% vs. 77%. specificity 50% vs. 59%. first-pass contrast-enhanced perfusion imaging (measuring perfusion reserve) may also have ability to differentiate triple from single-vessel CAD. Reference -. quantitative MR perfusion imaging may help detect coronary artery stenosis (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study. 37 patients with suspected CAD had stress imaging with quantitative perfusion CMR and coronary angiography (reference standard). 108 coronary artery segments included in analysis. diagnostic performance of quantitative perfusion CMR for detection of ≥ 50% stenosis. sensitivity 85%. specificity 49%. Reference -.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)|Coronary magnetic resonance-guided care
myocardial-perfusion MRI and invasive angiography with measurement of fractional flow reserve to guide initial management of patients with angina and risk factor for coronary artery disease have similar rate of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) at 1 year (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on randomized noninferiority trial. 918 adults (mean age 62 years, 72% men) with typical angina receiving guideline-directed therapy were randomized to myocardial-perfusion cardiovascular MRI vs. invasive angiography with measurement of fractional flow reserve (FFR). all patients had Canadian Cardiovascular Society class II-III angina and ≥ 2 cardiovascular risk factors (smoking, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and family history of coronary artery disease) or positive exercise treadmill test. all patients having coronary revascularization received dual antiplatelet therapy. revascularization recommended if ≥ 6% of myocardium was ischemic or FFR ≤ 0.8. MACE defined as all-cause death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or target-vessel revascularization. noninferiority of cardiovascular-MRI evaluation defined as 12-month incidence of MACE < 6% higher than FFR evaluation at limit of 95% CI for difference. 84% included in per-protocol analysis, 100% in intention-to-treat analysis. comparing cardiovascular-MRI vs. FFR. MACE in 3.4% vs. 3.1% (95% CI for difference 2.3% lower to 2.7% higher, noninferiority met) in per-protocol analysis. MACE in intention-to-treat analysis (all not significant). all-cause death in 0.9% vs. 0.4%. cardiac death in 0.4% vs. 0.4%. nonfatal myocardial infarction in 2% vs. 2.1%. target-vessel revascularization in 0.7% vs. 1.5%. no angina at 12 months in 49.2% vs. 43.8% (not significant). revascularization recommended in 40.5% vs. 45.9% (not significant). revascularization performed in 35.7% vs. 45% (p = 0.005). other serious adverse events. respiratory, thoracic, and mediastinal disorders in 13.9% vs. 15.5% (not significant). vascular disorders in 13.9% vs. 11.4% (not significant). surgical and medical procedures in 3.3% vs. 2% (not significant). consistent results for noninferiority of MACE in intention-to-treat analysis. Reference - MR-INFORM trial (). in symptomatic patients with suspected CAD, coronary magnetic resonance-guided care may reduce risk of unnecessary angiography compared to guideline-guided care, but not compared to myocardial perfusion scintigraphy-guided care (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial with differential adherence. 1,202 symptomatic patients (mean age 56 years) with suspected CAD and pretest likelihood 10%-90% (mean 49.5%) in United Kingdom were randomized to care guided by 1 of 3 strategies and followed for ≥ 12 months. coronary magnetic resonance (CMR). National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines, with specific imaging techniques indicated according to patient's pretest likelihood. myocardial perfusion scintigraphy (MPS). 86.1% in CMR group, 83.3% in NICE guidelines group, and 76.5% in MPS group had initial randomized test and adhered to management guided by test results. unnecessary coronary angiography defined as normal fractional flow reserve (> 0.8) or quantitative coronary angiography showing < 70% stenosis in 1 view or < 50% in 2 orthogonal views in all coronary vessels ≥ 2.5 mm in diameter. 17.7% in CMR group, 42.5% in NICE guidelines group, and 16.2% in MPS group had invasive coronary angiography at 12 months. unnecessary angiography in. 7.5% with CMR (p < 0.001 vs. NICE guidelines, NNT 5) (not significant vs. MPS). 28.8% with NICE guidelines. 7.1% with MPS. no significant differences in incidence of. positive angiography comparing CMR (9.8%) to each of NICE guidelines (12.1%) or MPS (8.7%). major adverse cardiac events comparing CMR (2.5%) to each of NICE guidelines (1.7%) or MPS (2.5%). Reference - CE-MARC 2 trial ().
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) intravascular ultrasound imaging
NIRS intravascular ultrasound imaging detection of increased plaque lipid burden in nonobstructive arteries associated with increased risk of subsequent major cardiac adverse event (MACE) in patients having cardiac catheterization and possible percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on prospective cohort study. 1,563 patients having cardiac catheterization and who had successful and uncomplicated PCI or deferral, as well as ≥ 50 mm of NIRS intravascular ultrasound imaging data from ≥ 2 major nonstented nonculprit coronary arteries were enrolled. amount of lipid-core plaque in image was quantified as Lipid Core Burden Index over 4 mm segment (LCBI4mm). 11 patients did not have analyzable NIRS intravascular ultrasound in any vessels scanned. all patients with large lipid rich plaques (LRPs) defined as ≥ 250 maximum LCBI4mm and half of patients (randomly selected) with small LRPs defined as < 250 maximum LCBI4mm were included in analysis. 1,271 patients (median age 64 years, 69% men, 87% had PCI) were followed for mean of 692 days. MACE defined as cardiac death or arrest, nonfatal myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndrome, revascularization by coronary artery bypass grafting or PCI, or readmission to hospital for angina with > 20% diameter stenosis progression related to and unrelated to treatment at index procedure. 9% had nonculprit MACE over mean follow-up of 692 days. increased risk of nonculprit MACE associated with. increasing maximum LCBI4mm (adjusted hazard ratio 1.18 per 100-unit increase, 95% CI 1.05-1.32). maximum LCBI4mm > 400 (adjusted hazard ratio 1.89, 95% CI 1.26-2.83). consistent results in adjusted plaque-level analysis evaluating association between maximum LCBI4mm > 400 in segment and occurrence of nonculprit MACE in same segment (follow-up culprit event location was identified by imaging or autopsy). 0.4% had NIRS intravascular ultrasound device-related event. Reference - Lipid-Rich Plaque (LRP) study ().
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Measurement of left ventricular function
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) recommendations for resting imaging to assess cardiac structure and function. use Doppler echocardiography to assess resting left ventricular systolic and diastolic function and evaluate abnormalities of myocardium, cardiac valves, and pericardium in patients with suspected or known ischemic heart disease and any of (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). prior myocardial infarction. pathologic Q waves. signs or symptoms of heart failure. complex ventricular arrhythmias. undiagnosed cardiac murmur. consider resting echocardiography to assess cardiac structure and function in patients with hypertension and diabetes and abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). consider radionuclide imaging to measure left ventricular function in patients with prior myocardial infarction or pathologic Q waves without (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). signs or symptoms of heart failure. complex ventricular arrhythmias. undiagnosed cardiac murmur. do not perform routine (ACCF/AHA Class III, Level C). assessment of left ventricular function. with any of the following. echocardiography. radionuclide imaging. cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. cardiac computed tomography. in patients with. normal ECG. no prior myocardial infarction. no signs or symptoms of heart failure. no complex arrhythmias. reassessment (< 1 year) in patients with. no change in clinical status. no possible change in therapy.
_Diagnosis|Imaging studies|Coronary angiography
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) recommendations for coronary angiography for risk assessment. perform for patients with stable CAD. who survived sudden cardiac arrest or life-threatening arrhythmia as initial test for assessing risk (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). with signs and symptoms of heart failure as initial test for assessing risk (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). with high likelihood of severe CAD based on clinical characteristics and noninvasive testing if benefits may outweigh risks (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). with presumed stable CAD, unacceptable ischemia on guideline-directed medical therapy, and candidates for revascularization (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). consider for patients with suspected CAD. if clinical characteristics and noninvasive testing indicate high likelihood of severe ischemic heart disease and are candidates for revascularization (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). if stress testing contraindicated or results of stress testing inconclusive and high likelihood that coronary angiography results will inform therapeutic options (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). if stress testing results are of unacceptable quality but are negative despite high clinical suspicion of CAD and high likelihood that coronary angiography results will inform therapeutic options (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C. consider for patients with stable CAD. if left ventricular ejection fraction < 50%, moderate risk/demonstrated ischemia on noninvasive testing (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). if inconclusive risk following noninvasive testing or for patients in whom noninvasive testing contraindicated or inadequate (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). if angina reduces quality of life and patient has preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (> 50%) with intermediate risk based on noninvasive testing (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). do not perform for patients with. stable CAD who are not candidates for revascularization or elect not to have revascularization procedures (ACCF/AHA Class III, Level B). stable CAD and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (> 50%) with low risk based on noninvasive testing (ACCF/AHA Class III, Level B). low risk based on clinical characteristics without any prior noninvasive testing (ACCF/AHA Class III, Level C). asymptomatic patients with no ischemia on noninvasive testing (ACCF/AHA Class III, Level C). ≥ 50% diameter stenosis on coronary angiography has poor agreement with fractional flow reserve ≤ 0.8 for classifying of stenosis severity (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study. 2,986 patients (mean age 66 years, 63% men) had quantitative coronary angiography and invasive measurement of fraction flow reserve. 4,086 stable coronary stenoses assessed. each patient had ≥ 1 stenosis of intermediate severity by angiography. fractional flow reserve ≤ 0.8 considered likely to induce reversible myocardial ischemia. for prediction of fractional flow reserve ≤ 0.8, > 50% diameter stenosis on quantitative coronary angiography had. sensitivity 61% overall (range 35%-74% depending upon anatomical site). specificity 67% overall (range 58%-76% depending upon anatomical site). positive likelihood ratio 1.87. negative likelihood ration 0.57. 35% had discordant results between angiography and fractional flow reserve. Reference -. cohort study evaluating performance of computational methods for estimating fractional flow reserve based on intravascular optical coherence tomography with comparison to angiographic stenosis assessment can be found in. vascular closure devices may decrease time to hemostasis and time to mobilization compared to compression, and collagen-based closure devices may reduce risk of groin hematoma in patients having percutaneous common femoral artery puncture (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on Cochrane review limited by heterogeneity. systematic review of 52 randomized or quasi-randomized trials evaluating vascular closure devices (VCD) in 19,192 patients having percutaneous common femoral artery puncture. 11 trials enrolled patients having diagnostic catheterization, 15 trials enrolled patients having interventional procedures, and 24 trials enrolled patients having diagnostic or interventional procedure. comparing metal clip-based VCD to manual or mechanical compression. metal clip-based VCD associated with shorter time to. hemostasis (mean difference [MD] -14.81 minutes, 95% CI -16.98 to -12.63 minutes) in analysis of 5 trials with 1,665 patients. mobilization in 3 trials with 1,303 patients (meta-analysis precluded by heterogeneity in results). no significant differences in. groin hematoma in analysis of 4 trials with 1,523 patients. pseudoaneurysm in analysis of 6 trials with 1,966 patients. vascular injury requiring repair in analysis of 3 trials with 783 patients (only 2 events overall). no infection in either group in 3 trials with 783 patients. comparing suture-based VCD to manual or mechanical compression. suture-based VCD associated with. shorter time to. hemostasis (MD -14.58 minutes, 95% CI -16.85 to -12.32 minutes) in analysis of 7 trials with 1,664 patients. mobilization in 7 trials with 1,597 patients (meta-analysis precluded by heterogeneity in results). nonsignificant reduction in groin hematoma (odds ratio [OR] 0.65, 95% CI 0.41-1.02) in analysis of 6 trials with 1,350 patients. no significant differences in. infection in analysis of 3 trials with 750 patients (only 3 events overall). pseudoaneurysm in analysis of 6 trials with 1,527 patients. no events for vascular injury requiring repair in 1 trial with 60 patients. comparing collagen-based VCD to manual or mechanical compression. for time to mobilization (meta-analysis precluded by heterogeneity in results). collagen-based VCD significantly decreased time to mobilization in 14 trials with 2,555 patients. no significant difference in 1 trial with 1,001 patients. collagen-based VCD associated with. shorter time to hemostasis in 14 trials with 2,548 patients (meta-analysis precluded by heterogeneity in results). lower risk of groin hematoma in analysis of 25 trials with 10,247 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. odds ratio (OR) 0.46 (95% CI 0.4-0.54). NNT 16-20 with groin hematoma in 11% of compression group. lower risk of pseudoaneurysm in analysis of 21 trials with 9,342 patients. OR 0.74 (95% CI 0.55-0.99). NNT 101-4,545 with pseudoaneurysm in 2.2% of compression group. nonsignificant increase in infection (RR 2.14, 95% CI 0.88-5.22) in analysis of 9 trials with 7,616 patients. no events in 5 trials with 3,537 patients. 9 events in 4 trials with 3,770 patients (no significant differences between groups in any trial). 12 events in 1 trial with 309 patients (significantly higher infection rate in collagen-based VCD group). no significant difference in vascular injury requiring repair in analysis of 5 trials with 5,731 patients. Reference -. vascular closure devices are as effective as manual compression for access site-related vascular complications and shorten time to hemostasis in patients having diagnostic coronary angiography without planned invasive procedures (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on randomized noninferiority trial (largest study in above Cochrane review). 4,524 patients having diagnostic coronary angiography with 6 French sheath through common femoral artery were randomized to intravascular closure device vs. extravascular closure device vs. manual compression and followed for 30 days. patients excluded for percutaneous coronary intervention or other planned invasive diagnostic or interventional procedures, severe arterial hypertension, and femoral artery diameter < 5 mm. access site-related vascular complications included hematoma ≥ 5 cm, pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula, access site-related major bleeding, acute ipsilateral leg ischemia, vascular surgical or interventional treatment, and local infection. noninferiority margin was limit of 1-sided 97.5% CI ≤ 2% for difference between groups in complication rates. comparing any vascular closure device vs. manual compression. access site-related vascular complications in 6.9% vs. 7.9% (difference -1%, limit of 97.5% CI 0.7%, noninferiority met). median time to hemostasis 1 minute vs. 10 minutes (p < 0.001). hematoma ≥ 5 cm in 4.8% vs. 6.8% (p = 0.006, NNT 50). repeat manual compression in 1.8% vs. 0.7% (p = 0.003, NNH 91). no significant differences among groups in pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula, or access site-related major bleeding. intravascular closure device associated with shorter time to hemostasis and lower closure device failure rate vs. extravascular closure device (p < 0.001 for each). Reference - ISAR-CLOSURE trial (). transradial catheterization for coronary angiography may be more comfortable and less costly than transfemoral catheterization. based on randomized trial. 200 patients having diagnostic cardiac catheterization at one institution randomized to transradial catheterization vs. transfemoral catheterization. comparing transradial catheterization vs transfemoral catheterization. median hospital stay 3.6 hours for transradial catheterization vs. 10.4 hours for transfemoral catheterization (p < 0.0001). transradial catheterization associated with significantly better symptom and functional scores (better quality of life) at 1 day and 1 week. Reference - , editorial can be found in. routine heparin prior to angiography may not improve radial artery patency compared to provisional heparin (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). based on randomized trial without clinical outcomes. 400 patients having coronary angiography randomized to provisional heparin 50 units/kg IV bolus after procedure if radial artery patency not maintained vs. routine heparin 50 units/kg IV following sheath insertion and followed for 30 days. radial artery patency determined by plethysmography at 24 hours and 30 days. comparing provisional heparin vs. mandatory heparin. patent hemostasis obtained in 74% vs. 67% (p = 0.1). radial artery occlusion at 30 days in 5% vs. 4.5% (not significant). Reference - PHAROAH trial (). additional information. 2-4 hours of bed rest associated with reduced back pain compared to 6 hours of bed rest following diagnostic transfemoral catheterization (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review with incomplete reporting of trial quality. systematic review of 20 randomized or quasi-randomized trials comparing durations of bed rest from 2 to 24 hours following diagnostic transfemoral catheterization before ambulation was permitted in 4,019 patients. specific quality measures not reported. compared to 6 hours bed rest, 2-4 hours bed rest associated with reduced back pain at 2, 4, and 6 hours follow-up (p ≤ 0.001 for all) in analysis of 2 trials. no significant differences across categories of duration of bed rest in bleeding, hematoma, bruising, pseudoaneurysm, thrombus, or arteriovenous fistula. Reference - , commentary can be found in. ambulation 1 hour after diagnostic cardiac catheterization may be safe with transfemoral approach using 5F catheter system. based on retrospective cohort study. 1,005 patients having 1,009 transfemoral diagnostic cardiac catheterization with 5F sheaths evaluated. 33 (3.3%) had minor vascular complications including 14 (1.4%) hematomas < 4 cm and 19 (1.9%) cases of rebleeding that required repeated manual compression. only 1 patient had hematoma > 4 cm. no major complications. Reference - , editorial can be found in. early ambulation after cardiac catheterization may improve patient comfort and fatigue after cardiac catheterization (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on single-blind randomized trial. 70 patients with cardiac catheterization randomized to early ambulation vs. standard care. early ambulation was intermittent change of patient position during first 6 hours after catheterization then allowing patient to walk and perform self-care activities 7 hours after catheterization. standard care was 10-24 hour bed rest in supine position with affected leg straight and immobilized with sandbag on puncture site for ≥ 8 hours. no significant difference between treatments in bleeding and hematoma size. early ambulation group had significantly higher comfort and lower fatigue compared with the control group at 3, 6 and 8 hours and in morning after catheterization (p < 0.01). Reference -. consider renal arteriography during coronary arteriography or peripheral angiography if clinical suspicion and patient consent. reasonable to perform screening renal arteriography at time of cardiac catheterization in patients at increased risk for atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis who are candidates for revascularization. Reference - American Heart Association science advisory on renal arteriography at time of coronary arteriography , commentary can be found in.
_Diagnosis|Electrocardiography (ECG)
resting ECG indicated in all patients with chest pain and no known noncardiac cause (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). > 50% of patients with chronic stable angina have normal results on resting ECG. resting ECG findings that favor diagnosis of CAD include. evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. ST-T wave changes consistent with ischemia. evidence of previous Q-wave myocardial infarction (MI). bundle branch block. conduction/rhythm disturbances Profound sinus bradycardia and sinus arrhythmia, with prolonged but varying PR interval likely due to changing autonomic tone. Normal QRS, QT intervals, normal QRS axis. Low limb-lead QRS voltage. There are downsloping ST segments and T wave inversions in leads I, II, III, aVF, V3, consistent with underlying myocardial ischemia. EBSCO Information Services. standard exercise ECG indicated in select patients with suspected CAD or for risk assessment in patients with known CAD - see Cardiac stress testing for information. cardiodynamicsgram may help diagnose CAD in patients with nondiagnostic ECGs (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study without external validation cohort. 421 patients (mean age 58 years, 68% men) with suspected CAD and nondiagnostic ECGs were assessed with cardiodynamicsgram and coronary angiography (reference standard). exclusion criteria were ST-segment changes, positive myocardial enzyme tests, valvular heart disease, heart failure, pulmonary arterial hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, atrial fibrillation, frequent premature beat, atrioventricular block, bundle branch blocks, and prior myocardial infarction or cardiac surgery. cardiodynamicsgram derived from 12-lead ECG data converted into 3-dimensional graphics; irregular, scattered, and nonannular shapes suggest CAD due to heterogeneous repolarization. 82.4% had CAD by reference standard (defined as ≥ 50% stenosis in ≥ 1 of 3 main coronary arteries). for detection of CAD, cardiodynamicsgram had. sensitivity 84.7%. specificity 85.1%. positive predictive value 96.4%. negative predictive value 54.3%. positive likelihood ratio 5.7. negative likelihood ratio 0.17. Reference -. computerized 2-lead resting ECG analysis may predict coronary artery stenosis (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on meta-analysis without systematic search. Multi Function-Cardiogram (MCG, also called 3DMP) is 2-lead computerized resting ECG signal analysis device. meta-analysis of 3 cohort studies of patients who had MCG and coronary angiography for any indication. 84 patients (7.2%) excluded due to inability to obtain adequate MCG tracing quality; 30 patients excluded due to legal limitations in obtaining angiograms for external review. 1,076 patients included in meta-analysis. MCG provides severity score 0-20. 467 patients (43.4%) had hemodynamically relevant stenosis on angiography defined as coronary artery sclerosis > 70% in any vessel or ≥ 50% in left main coronary artery. diagnostic accuracy of MCG (score ≥ 4) for identifying hemodynamically relevant stenosis. sensitivity 91.2%. specificity 84.6%. positive predictive value (PPV) 81.9%. negative predictive value (NPV) 92.6%. Reference -. computerized 2-lead resting ECG analysis may predict coronary artery stenosis (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study with high dropout rate. 562 patients without prior coronary revascularization were evaluated with computer-enhanced, 2-lead resting ECG analysis device (3DMP) before coronary angiography. 139 (24.7%) excluded from analysis (17 due to poor ECG tracing quality and 122 due to lack of risk factor information). 201 (47.5%) of 423 analyzed patients had hemodynamically relevant stenosis on coronary angiography. 3DMP (using cutoff 4) had 89.1% sensitivity, 81.1% specificity, 79% PPV and 90% NPV for identifying hemodynamically relevant stenosis. Reference -. 3DMP computerized 2-lead resting ECG analysis with cutoff of 4 may predict coronary artery stenosis after coronary revascularization (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study without validation. 172 patients with history of coronary revascularization were evaluated with 3DMP before coronary angiography (reference standard). 41 patients (23.8%) excluded from analysis (7 due to poor ECG tracing quality and 34 due to lack of risk factor information). 32% prevalence of hemodynamically relevant stenosis. diagnostic performance of 3DMP with cutoff of 4 for identifying hemodynamically relevant stenosis had. sensitivity 90.9%. specificity 88%. positive predictive value (PPV) 62.7%. negative predictive value (NPV) 97.8%. Reference -.
_Diagnosis|Wellens' electrocardiography (ECG) pattern (also called Wellens' syndrome)
general information. Wellens' pattern or syndrome (also referred to as left anterior descending artery [LAD] coronary T wave syndrome) refers to T-wave changes associated with critical stenosis in proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery. critical LAD stenosis associated with risk for anterior wall myocardial infarction. Wellens' pattern or syndrome criteria. history of anginal chest pain. isoelectric or minimally elevated (< 1 mm) ST-segment with straight or convex morphology that leads to a negative (inverted) T wave at an angle of 60-90 degrees. biphasic T waves in the right to midprecordial leads. absence of Q waves. normal precordial R wave progression. negative serum cardiac biomarker abnormalities (may be normal or minimally elevated). T wave abnormalities may persist for hours to weeks (even in the absence of symptoms) and may have 2 observed ECG patterns, including. Reference -. T wave abnormalities hypothesized to be associated with myocardial edema rather than systolic dysfunction (). ECG and coronary angiography images of a 31-year-old man with Wellens' syndrome can be found in. Wellens' pattern associated with increased risk of significant stenosis in left anterior descending (LAD) artery and anterior wall myocardial infarction in patients hospitalized for unstable angina. based on cohort study. 145 consecutive patients (mean age 58 years) hospitalized for unstable angina were evaluated. 26 patients had Wellens' pattern (abnormal ST-segment changes and inverted T waves in anterior chest leads without QRS changes) within 24 hours of admission. 22 patients had normal serial cardiac biomarker levels, including creatinine phosphokinase (CPK), serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT), and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH). 13 patients had cardiac catheterization. 12 had significant stenosis (defined as ≥ 70% luminal diameter stenosis), and all of these had ≥ 90% stenosis in the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. 1 patient had normal coronary arteries but prolapse of the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve. 12 of 16 patients without surgical intervention developed anterior wall myocardial infarction within 39 days. 2 patients died from congestive heart failure within 12 hours of myocardial infarction. 1 patient died from ventricular tachycardia 6 weeks after myocardial infarction. 9 patients who did not develop myocardial infarction had coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) mean 33 days after onset of angina. Reference -. Wellens' pattern associated with significant coronary artery stenosis and poor prognosis in patients treated medically. based on retrospective cohort study. 118 consecutive patients with unstable angina were evaluated in coronary care unit for ≥ 48 hours and categorized by treatment groups. 42 patients had coronary angiography plus coronary artery bypass graft (CABG). 31 patients had coronary angiography plus medical treatment. 45 patients did not have coronary angiography due to resolution of symptoms with drug therapy, age, or comorbidity that precluded surgery and were treated medically. 40% had Wellens' pattern with new T wave inversions (> 2 mm) with or without nonsignificant ST-segment depressions. mean follow-up 19 months in patients with CABG and 16 months in patients with medical treatment. all patients had negative cardiac biomarkers for myocardial infarction. 73 patients had coronary angiography, including 27 patients with Wellens' pattern. 56 patients had significant stenosis (defined as ≥ 70% stenosis) of ≥ 1 coronary artery (48% had single vessel disease, 27% had double vessel disease, and 25% had triple vessel disease). 3 patients had 50%-70% stenosis of 1 coronary artery. 2 patients had < 50% stenosis of 1 coronary artery. 12 patients had no stenosis. for predicting significant left anterior descending (LAD) artery stenosis, new T wave inversion had sensitivity 69% and specificity 89%. 95% of patients completed follow-up. comparing patients with T wave inversion vs. patients without T wave inversion. significant stenosis in 87% vs. 62% (p < 0.001). cardiac events (defined as cardiac death or myocardial infarction) in patients treated medically 38% vs. 16% (p < 0.05). cardiac events in patients treated with CABG 18% vs. 11% (not significant). Reference -.
_Diagnosis|Cardiac stress testing
cardiac stress testing. indications for exercise testing. diagnosis of obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) in symptomatic patients with intermediate pretest probability of CAD and interpretable electrocardiogram (ECG) (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). risk assessment in patients with known CAD and interpretable ECG (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). risk stratification in select patients with acute coronary syndrome treated with ischemia-guided strategy (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). selected indications in patients with valvular heart disease or cardiac rhythm disorders. not recommended for routine screening of asymptomatic men or women (ACC/AHA Class III). contraindications to exercise testing include. acute myocardial infarction (within 2 days). ongoing unstable angina. uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias with hemodynamic compromise. active endocarditis. symptomatic severe aortic stenosis. decompensated heart failure. acute pulmonary embolus, pulmonary infarction, or deep vein thrombosis. acute myocarditis or pericarditis. acute aortic dissection. physical disability that may limit safe and adequate testing. pharmacologic alternatives to exercise for stress testing include vasodilators (adenosine, dipyridamole, regadenoson) and cardiac stimulants (dobutamine). exercise testing for diagnosis of CAD. perform standard exercise ECG in patients able to exercise with intermediate pretest probability of CAD and interpretable ECG (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). exercise test considered positive for ischemia if ≥ 1 mm of horizontal or downsloping ST-segment depression or elevation at least 60-80 milliseconds after end of QRS complex during peak exercise. exercise stress testing appears to have moderate sensitivity and specificity for detecting coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). imaging modalities may be added to exercise or pharmacologic stress testing to improve accuracy in specific clinical situations. nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) or echocardiography indicated for. diagnosis of CAD in patients with intermediate-to-high pretest probability of CAD and uninterpretable ECG (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). risk assessment in patients with known CAD and/or follow-up testing in patients with known stable CAD and change in clinical status if uninterpretable ECG (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). risk stratification in select patients with acute coronary syndrome treated with ischemia-guided strategy (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). stress imaging appears to have moderate sensitivity and specificity for detecting coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging indicated for. patients with known stable CAD being considered for revascularization due to coronary stenosis of unknown physiological significance (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). risk stratification in select patients with acute coronary syndrome treated with ischemia-guided strategy (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging appears moderately sensitive and specific for detection of coronary artery disease in populations with high disease prevalence (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). see Cardiac stress testing for details. outpatient stress testing appears safe for low-risk patients with chest pain. based on cohort study. 979 patients determined by algorithm to be low risk for coronary artery disease (CAD) and low risk for short-term adverse cardiac events. criteria for low risk used in protocol required negative CK-MB and negative troponin at least 6 hours after symptom onset, no ischemic changes on ECG, and none of any. inability to perform stress testing due to disability, exercise intolerance, left bundle branch block or abnormal ECG. age > 70 years old. chest or left arm pain or discomfort as chief symptom, unless clearly not cardiac. history of prior myocardial infarction (MI) or invasive revascularization. new mitral regurgitation, hypotension, diaphoresis, or rales. T-wave inversion (2 mm or higher) in 2 contiguous leads with symptoms, or 1 mm or higher in leads with dominant R waves. ST segment elevation > 1 mm. ST segment depression > 0.5 mm. 2-3 cardiac risk factors. diabetes. extracardiac vascular disease. pathologic Q waves. accelerating tempo of anginal symptoms in preceding 48 hours. ongoing chest pain > 20 minutes (if typically relieved by nitrates or analgesics). angina with S3, new or worse rales, murmur, hypotension, new or worsening mitral regurgitation. angina at rest with ECG changes. among 871 patients followed for outpatient stress testing who had follow-up at 6 months, none died and 3 had MI. among 67 patients who did not have outpatient testing and had follow-up at 6 months, none died and none had MI. Reference -. pretesting discussion to reinforce explanation of normal test results might reduce rate of persistent chest pain at 1 month in patients referred for exercise testing (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial without statistically significant results. 92 patients with chest pain referred for exercise stress test were randomized to 1 of 3 groups. information sheet before testing (procedure and risks of complications). 450-word pamphlet including discussion of normal results and other reasons for chest pain. pamphlet followed by discussion with psychologist to reinforce low risk for CAD if normal test. patients with normal exercise stress test received standard reassurance from cardiologist. 15 patients had positive exercise stress test and were excluded from analysis, 5 patients could not be followed up at 1 month. proportion of patients reporting chest pain at 1 month (based on 72 patients). 9 of 24 (37.5%) control group. 7 of 25 (28%) pamphlet group. 4 of 23 (17%) discussion group. differences between groups not statistically significant. proportion of patients taking cardiac drugs at 1 month (based on 72 patients, p = 0.07). 6 of 24 (25%) control group. 2 of 25 (8%) pamphlet group. 1 of 23 (4.3%) discussion group. differences between groups not statistically significant. Reference - , editorial can be found in.
_Management|Management overview
risk reduction for secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. comprehensive cardiovascular rehabilitation program (including exercise, education, and facilitation of risk reduction strategies) recommended for most patients, and associated with reduced total and cardiac mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). dietary changes including limiting saturated fat and trans fat intake and increasing fresh fruit and vegetable intake are recommended (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B) and associated with reduced risk for cardiovascular events (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). lifestyle changes associated with reduction in all-cause mortality in CAD patients include. smoking cessation (level 2 [mid-level] evidence); at every visit, advise every tobacco user and family members who smoke to quit (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). increased physical activity (level 2 [mid-level] evidence); encourage 30-60 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (brisk walking) on most days (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B) and resistance training 2 days/week (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). moderate alcohol use (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). weight management recommended with goals of body mass index (BMI) 18.5-24.9 kg/m and waist circumference < 40 inches (102 cm) for men, < 35 inches (89 cm) for women (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). statin therapy recommended (ESC Class I, Level A; ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A if age 21-75 years, ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B if > 75 years old) and reduces mortality and myocardial infarction in adults with CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). target blood pressure < 140/90 mm Hg recommended for most patients with CAD; reaching systolic blood pressure ≤ 130 mm Hg associated with reduced risk of heart failure and stroke but increased risk of hypotension (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors reduce rates of mortality, myocardial infarction and hospital admission for heart failure (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence) and are recommended for all patients with left ventricular ejection fraction (LEVRF) ≤ 40%, hypertension, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A). beta blockers may reduce mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) and are recommended if heart failure, LVEF ≤ 40%, prior myocardial infarction, or prior acute coronary syndrome. antiplatelet therapy. aspirin 75-162 mg/day recommended for all patients with CAD unless contraindicated (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A). clopidogrel 75 mg once daily recommended as alternative for patients intolerant of or allergic to aspirin (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). duration of therapy of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) after stent placement in patients with stable ischemic heart disease/stable coronary artery disease. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommendations. for patients with bare metal stents. give P2Y12 inhibitor therapy using clopidogrel for at least 1 month (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). reasonable to continue DAPT using clopidogrel for > 1 month in patients who have tolerated DAPT without bleeding complication and who are not at high bleeding risk (for example, prior bleeding on DAPT, coagulopathy, oral anticoagulant use) (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level A). for patients with drug eluting stents. give P2Y12 inhibitor therapy using clopidogrel for at least 6 months (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B-R). reasonable to continue DAPT using clopidogrel for > 6 months in patients who have tolerated DAPT without bleeding complication and who are not at high bleeding risk (for example, prior bleeding on DAPT, coagulopathy, oral anticoagulant use) (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level A). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommendations. DAPT consisting of clopidogrel and aspirin generally recommended for 6 months in patients with coronary stent implantation, irrespective of stent type (ESC Class I, Level A). consider DAPT for 3 months in patients with high bleeding risk (for example, ≥ 25) (ESC Class IIa, Level B). consider continuing DAPT with clopidogrel for > 6 months and < 30 months in patients tolerating DAPT without bleeding complication and at low bleeding (but high thrombotic) risk (ESC Class IIb, Level A). consider DAPT for 1 month for patients in whom 3-month DAPT poses safety concerns (ESC Class IIb, Level C). for information on antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs in patients with acute coronary syndromes and ST-elevation myocardial infarction (including dual antiplatelet therapy duration after ACS/STEMI), see Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for acute coronary syndromes and Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). give annual influenza vaccination (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). medications for angina. use sublingual nitroglycerin or nitroglycerin spray for immediate relief of angina (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B) (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). beta blockers (examples include carvedilol, metoprolol succinate, bisoprolol) recommended as initial therapy for relief of symptoms in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). use calcium channel blockers or long-acting nitrates. for relief of symptoms if beta blockers clearly contraindicated or cause unacceptable adverse events (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). in combination with beta-blockers for relief of symptoms when beta blockers alone are unsuccessful (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). other medications with evidence for reducing angina frequency include ranolazine (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B), trimetazidine (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence)(level 2 [mid-level] evidence) and ivabradine (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). revascularization. generally appropriate for patients with stable CAD who have. left main coronary artery stenosis ≥ 50%. 2-vessel stenosis ≥ 70% including proximal left anterior descending artery. 3-vessel coronary artery stenosis ≥ 70%. coronary artery stenosis ≥ 70% and anginal symptoms despite maximal anti-ischemic therapy. routine follow-up. all patients with stable CAD should be evaluated at least annually (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). assess symptoms and clinical functioning. evaluate for possible complications, such as heart failure and arrhythmias. monitor cardiac risk factors. assess adequacy of and adherence to recommended lifestyle modifications and medical therapy.
_Management|Counseling|Patient education
provide patients with stable CAD an individualized education plan, including. importance of medication adherence for managing symptoms and decreasing disease progression (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). explanation of medication management and cardiovascular risk, delivered in a manner adequate for the patient (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). review comprehensively all treatment options (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). review of appropriate exercise regimens and amount of daily activity recommended (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). information on self-management (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). recognition of worsening cardiovascular symptoms and appropriate action (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). it is reasonable to educate patients with stable CAD on. adherence to diet with (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). high intake of fresh fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. low intake of cholesterol, saturated fat, and trans fat. reduced intake of sodium. common symptoms of stress and depression that may be associated with stress-induced angina (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). approaches to management of stress and depression (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). diagnosis and treatment of major depressive disorder if indicated (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). patient education may not reduce mortality or myocardial infarction but may reduce overall cardiovascular events in adults with coronary heart disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on Cochrane review limited by clinical heterogeneity. systematic review of 22 randomized trials comparing patient education as primary intention of cardiac rehabilitation intervention vs. usual care in 76,864 adults with coronary heart disease. interventions for patient education varied in intensity, content, and mode of delivery. no significant differences in. mortality at median 18 months (risk ratio [RR] 0.8, 95% CI 0.6-1.05) in analysis of 13 trials with 10,075 patients. fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction at median 33 months (RR 0.63, 95% CI 0.26-1.48) in analysis of 2 trials with 209 patients. total revascularization at median 36 months (RR 0.58, 95% CI 0.19-1.71) in analysis of 3 trials with 456 patients. cardiac-related hospitalization at median 12 months (RR 0.93, 95% CI 0.71-1.21) in analysis of 5 trials with 14,849 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. patient education associated with decrease in overall fatal or nonfatal cardiovascular events at median 21 months in analysis of 2 trials with 310 patients. RR 0.36 (95% CI 0.23-0.56). NNT 4-6 with overall fatal or nonfatal cardiovascular events in 39% of usual care group. Reference -.
_Management|Counseling|Psychological management
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association recommendations. for patients with stable CAD, reasonable to screen for depression and refer/treat when present (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). treatment of depression has not been shown to improve cardiovascular disease outcomes but may be reasonable for other clinical benefits (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommendations for patients with stable coronary artery disease. assess patients for psychosocial distress and offer appropriate care. refer for psychotherapy, medication, or collaborative care if clinically significant symptoms of depression, anxiety, and hostility. approach can reduce symptoms and enhance quality of life, although evidence inconclusive for definite beneficial effect on cardiac endpoints. Reference - 2013 ESC guideline on management of stable coronary artery disease ( ). National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance on secondary prevention following a myocardial infarction. stress management recommended in context of comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation. complex psychological interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy not routinely recommended. Reference - NICE guideline on secondary prevention in primary and secondary care for patients following a myocardial infarction ( PDF), summary can be found in. psychological interventions may decrease cardiac mortality in patients with coronary heart disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on Cochrane review of trials without blinding of patients. systematic review of 35 randomized trials comparing psychological interventions with or without cardiac rehabilitation vs. usual care in 10,703 adults with coronary heart disease. most trials assessed multicomponent psychological interventions with individual components including relaxation techniques (20 trials), self-awareness and self-monitoring (20 trials), emotional support or client-led discussion (15 trials), and cognitive challenge/cognitive restructuring techniques (19 trials). interventions were provided in groups (20 trials), individual sessions (10 trials), or both (5 trials). 10 trials included patients with confirmed psychological condition (mostly depression). psychological interventions associated with. decreased cardiac mortality at median follow-up 57 months in analysis of 11 trials with 4,792 patients. risk ratio (RR) 0.79 (95% CI 0.63-0.98). NNT 39-715 with cardiac mortality in 7% of usual care group. reduced depressive symptoms at median follow-up 12 months (standardized mean difference [SMD] -0.27, 95% CI -0.39 to -0.15) in analysis of 19 trials with 5,825 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. reduced anxiety at median follow-up 12 months (SMD -0.24, 95% CI -0.38 to -0.09) in analysis of 12 trials with 3,161 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. reduced stress at median follow-up 12 months (SMD -0.56, 95% CI -0.88 to -0.24) in analysis of 8 trials with 1,251 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. no significant differences in. all-cause mortality at median follow-up 13 months (RR 0.9, 95% CI 0.77-1.05) in analysis of 23 trials with 7,776 patients. non-fatal myocardial infarction at median follow-up 30 months (RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.64-1.05) in analysis of 13 trials with 7,845 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. revascularization at median follow-up 12 months (RR 0.94, 95% CI 0.81-1.11) in analysis of 13 trials with 6,822 patients. Reference -. cognitive behavioral therapy may reduce depression but not mortality or cardiovascular events in patients with CAD and comorbid depression (level 2 [mid-level] evidence); limited evidence regarding other psychologic interventions. based on Cochrane review of trials without attention control. systematic review of 16 randomized trials evaluating psychological and pharmacological interventions for depression in adults with CAD and comorbid depression. 8 trials evaluated psychological interventions (cognitive behavioral therapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy, interpersonal psychotherapy, nondirective or supportive therapy, and counseling). comparing cognitive behavioral therapy vs. usual care. cognitive behavioral therapy associated with significantly improved depression scores. at < 1 month in 1 trial with 46 patients. at 1-6 months in 1 trial with 1,802 patients, and nonsignificant improvement in 1 trial with 81 patients. at > 6 months in 1 trial with 81 patients. depression remission rates at > 6 months 73% vs. 35% (p < 0.05, NNT 3) in 1 trial with 81 patients. no significant difference in all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and cardiovascular events in 1 trial with 2,481 patients. for the otherwise high-quality trials supporting efficacy these trials were limited by absence of similar degree of attention in usual care control groups. comparing behavior therapy vs. person-centered therapy in 1 trial with 40 patients. no significant difference in depression scores at < 1 month. behavior therapy associated with significantly improved depression scores at 1-6 months and at > 6 months. comparing interpersonal psychotherapy vs. clinical management in 1 trial with 284 patients. interpersonal psychotherapy associated with nonsignificant improvement in depression at < 1 month. no significant difference in depression remission rates at < 1 month. no significant differences in depression outcomes at any time point comparing. resource-oriented psychotherapy vs. usual care in 1 trial with 81 patients. cognitive behavioral therapy vs. supportive stress management in 1 trial with 83 patients. Reference -. telephone-based, low-intensity collaborative care addressing psychiatric conditions may improve quality of life, depressive symptoms, and general functioning in adults with recent acute cardiac event and depression or anxiety (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on single-blinded randomized trial. 183 patients hospitalized for acute coronary syndrome, arrhythmia, or heart failure with clinical depression, generalized anxiety, or panic disorder randomized to telephone-based, low-intensity multicomponent collaborative care intervention targeting depression or anxiety disorder vs. enhanced usual care (serial notification of primary medical providers) and followed for 24 weeks. collaborative care included social work care manager who coordinated assessment and stepped care of psychiatric conditions as needed. collaborative care associated with greater mean improvements in health-related quality of life (p = 0.002), depressive symptoms (p = 0.045), and general functioning (p = 0.005). adequate treatment (prescription for standard dose of an established first-line treatment for depression and/or anxiety or referral to psychotherapy) in 75% vs. 7% (p < 0.001). no significant difference in response rates (50% reduction in Patient Health Questionnaire-9 for depression or 40% reduction in Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale—Anxiety Subscale). Reference - MOSAIC trial (), correction can be found in JAMA Intern Med 2014 Aug 1;174(8):1419, editorial can be found in. sertraline or aerobic exercise may improve depressive symptoms in patients with CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on small randomized trial. 101 patients (mean age 64 years) with CAD and depression randomized to sertraline 50-200 mg/day (40 patients) vs. aerobic exercise 3 times/week (37 patients) vs. placebo (24 patients) for 4 months. at baseline 47% met criteria for major depressive disorder. sertraline and aerobic exercise associated with significant improvement in depression symptoms (on Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression) vs. placebo. no significant difference in depression comparing sertraline vs. aerobic exercise. aerobic exercise associated with improved aerobic fitness (assessed by treadmill test) (p < 0.001 vs. either sertraline or placebo). Reference -. group-based psychosocial intervention associated with reduced mortality for women with CHD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial without attention control. 237 women ≤ 75 years old hospitalized for acute myocardial infarction (AMI), coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) were randomized to group-based psychosocial intervention vs. usual care. psychosocial intervention included. 20 sessions over 1 year for groups of 4-8 women starting 4 months after hospitalization. risk factor education, relaxation training, methods for coping with stress, self-care and compliance with clinical advice. patients followed for mean 7.1 years. death occurred in 7% psychosocial intervention group vs. 20% usual care group (p = 0.007, NNT 8). findings remained significant after adjustment for age, AMI, ejection fraction, and statin use (p < 0.05). adjustment for aspirin use plus intervention conferred borderline significance with hazard ratio (HR) 0.45 (95% CI 0.19-1.07, p = 0.07). Reference - SWITCHD trial ( ). cognitive behavioral therapy may reduce recurrent cardiovascular events in patients with CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial without attention control. 362 patients ≤ 75 years old who had been hospitalized for cardiovascular disease within 12 months were randomized to cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) focused on stress management in 20 two-hour sessions vs. no intervention for 1 year. all patients received traditional care. mean follow-up 94 months. comparing CBT vs. control. first recurrent cardiovascular disease event in 36.5% vs. 47.1% (p = 0.01, NNT 10). first recurrent acute myocardial infarction in 21.3% vs. 31.2% (p = 0.02, NNT 10). all-cause mortality 12% vs. 14.7% (not significant). Reference -. counseling, education, or cognitive behavioral therapy each might change maladaptive illness beliefs in patients with coronary heart disease (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). based on nonclinical outcomes from systematic review. systematic review of 13 randomized trials evaluating interventions to change maladaptive illness beliefs in 1,709 patients with coronary heart disease (myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, or future/recent revascularization via percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft surgery). interventions included. counseling and education (5 trials). cognitive behavioral therapy (3 trials). education (3 trials). identification of own gaps in knowledge and seeking education (2 trials). heterogeneity of outcome measures precluded meta-analysis. 8 of 13 studies found intervention associated with positive effect on belief change. Reference -.
_Management|Lifestyle modification
lifestyle modification involving diet and/or exercise may decrease percent coronary artery stenosis and carotid intimal-medial thickness in patients with atherosclerosis (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). based on systematic review without clinical outcomes. systematic review of 14 randomized trials comparing lifestyle modification involving diet and/or exercise vs. usual care in 1,259 patients with atherosclerosis (1,343 lesions). intervention duration ranged from 3 months to 9 years. 8 trials evaluated diet plus exercise, 3 trials evaluated exercise only, 3 trials evaluated diet only. most exercise regimens included aerobic exercise for 2.5-4.5 hours/week with or without stress management/yoga. dietary regimens were low calorie, low fat, and low cholesterol with regimens for coronary artery disease also being low carbohydrate. 7 trials evaluated coronary artery stenosis in patients with coronary artery disease, 7 trials evaluated carotid intimal-medial thickness in healthy or high-risk patients (obesity, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes). lifestyle modification associated with. decreased percent coronary artery stenosis in analysis of 7 trials. decreased carotid intimal-medial thickness in analysis of 7 trials. Reference -. nurse-coordinated referral to community-based lifestyle intervention programs may improve lifestyle-related risk factors following hospitalization in patients with coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial without intention-to-treat analysis. 824 adults (mean age 59 years, 79% men) with coronary artery disease who were hospitalized for acute coronary syndrome and/or coronary revascularization and who had ≥ 1 lifestyle-related risk factor were randomized to nurse-coordinated referral of patient and their partner to ≤ 3 community-based lifestyle improvement programs vs. usual care for 12 months. lifestyle-related risk factors included BMI ≥ 27 kg/m in 87%, physical inactivity in 63%, and smoking in 21%. lifestyle improvement programs included Weight Watchers for 1 year, internet-based program to increase physical activity for 1 year, and smoking cessation including telephone counseling and nicotine replacement or varenicline plus telephone motivational counselling for 3 months. all patients had guideline-based usual care that included cardiac rehabilitation and ≤ 4 nurse-led secondary prevention program visits (including counseling on healthy lifestyles, drug -treated risk factors, and medication adherence). improvements defined as ≥ 5% reduction in weight, ≥ 10% improvement in 6-minute walk distance, and urinary cotinine < 200 ng/mL (detection limit). 86% of patients were included in analysis. among patients in intervention group, 48% followed 1 lifestyle program, 34% followed 2 lifestyle programs, and 3% followed 3 lifestyle programs. improvement in ≥ 1 lifestyle-related risk factor (without deterioration in other 2) in 37% with intervention vs. 26% with usual care at 12 months (p = 0.002, NNT 9). Reference - RESPONSE-2 trial (). high intensity interval training may improve cardiovascular functional capacity and quality of life compared to moderate continuous training in patients with coronary artery disease after revascularization (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial with allocation concealment not stated. 72 patients (mean age 58 years) with stable New York Heart Association functional class I or II coronary artery disease with angina pectoris or myocardial infarction and no heart failure were randomized to high intensity interval training (HIIT) vs. moderate continuous training for 8 weeks. all patients were randomized within 6 weeks after revascularization procedure. in both groups, patients exercised for 40 minutes per session, 3 days per week using a cycle ergometer. first month of HIIT included 20-second intervals at intensity equal to 50% of maximum load reached by steep ramp test; exercise intensity was adjusted in second month based on a new steep ramp test. in first month of moderate continuous training, patients kept training heart rate below that at first ventilatory threshold (VT1); exercise intensity was adjusted in second month to training heart rate corresponding to that at VT1 plus 10%. cardiovascular functional capacity measured by peak oxygen uptake (peak VO2). 100% included in analysis. comparing HIIT vs. moderate continuous training at 8 weeks. mean change in peak VO2 4.5 mL/kg/minute vs. 2.5 mL/kg/minute (p < 0.05). mean increase in distance on 6-minute walk test 49.6 meters vs. 29.6 meters (p < 0.05). HIIT associated with greater improvement in emotional, mental health, self-reported health status, and mental health-related quality of life measures on short form-36 compared to moderate continuous training (p < 0.01 for each). Reference -.
_Management|Medications|Drugs for secondary prevention
lipid management. ACC/AHA recommends ≥ 50% reduction in LDL cholesterol; ESC recommends low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol < 1.8 mmol/L (< 70 mg/dL); NICE recommends > 40% reduction in non-high-density lipoprotein (non-HDL) cholesterol. statin therapy. ACC/AHA recommends high-intensity statin with goal LDL cholesterol reduction ≥ 50% in patients ≤ 75 years old (AHA/ACC Class I, Level A), and suggests moderate- or high-intensity statin in patients > 75 years old after evaluating risks and benefits of therapy high-intensity statin therapy (AHA/ACC Class IIa, Level B-R). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommends statins in all patients with stable coronary artery disease (ESC Class I, Level A). NICE recommends starting with atorvastatin 80 mg/day, or lower dose if potential drug interactions or high risk of adverse effects. statins reduce mortality, myocardial infarction, and stroke in adults with CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence), although reduction of mortality and stroke in women is based on limited data (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). non-statin therapies. consider adding ezetimibe to maximally-tolerated statin therapy in patients with LDL-C ≥ 70 mg/dL (≥ 1.8 mmol/L) who are at very high risk (AHA/ACC Class IIa, Level B-R). consider adding PCSK9 inhibitor after evaluating risks and benefits of therapy in patients at very high risk with LDL-C ≥ 70 mg/dL (≥ 1.8 mmol/L) or non-HDL-C level ≥ 100 mg/dL (≥ 2.6 mmol/L) despite maximally tolerated combination therapy of a statin with ezetimibe (AHA/ACC Class IIa, Level A). fibric acid derivatives may reduce coronary mortality and myocardial infarction in some patients with CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). for use of PCSK9 inhibitors in combination with diet and maximally-tolerated statin therapy in adults with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease who require additional lowering of LDL cholesterol see Hypercholesterolemia. antiplatelet therapy. aspirin 75-162 mg/day recommended for all patients with CAD unless contraindicated (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A). clopidogrel 75 mg once daily recommended as alternative for patients intolerant of or allergic to aspirin (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). duration of therapy of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) after stent placement in patients with stable ischemic heart disease/stable coronary artery disease. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommendations. for patients with bare metal stents. give P2Y12 inhibitor therapy using clopidogrel for at least 1 month (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). reasonable to continue DAPT using clopidogrel for > 1 month in patients who have tolerated DAPT without bleeding complication and who are not at high bleeding risk (for example, prior bleeding on DAPT, coagulopathy, oral anticoagulant use) (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level A). for patients with drug eluting stents. give P2Y12 inhibitor therapy using clopidogrel for at least 6 months (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B-R). reasonable to continue DAPT using clopidogrel for > 6 months in patients who have tolerated DAPT without bleeding complication and who are not at high bleeding risk (for example, prior bleeding on DAPT, coagulopathy, oral anticoagulant use) (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level A). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommendations. DAPT consisting of clopidogrel and aspirin generally recommended for 6 months in patients with coronary stent implantation, irrespective of stent type (ESC Class I, Level A). consider DAPT for 3 months in patients with high bleeding risk (for example, ≥ 25) (ESC Class IIa, Level B). consider continuing DAPT with clopidogrel for > 6 months and < 30 months in patients tolerating DAPT without bleeding complication and at low bleeding (but high thrombotic) risk (ESC Class IIb, Level A). consider DAPT for 1 month for patients in whom 3-month DAPT poses safety concerns (ESC Class IIb, Level C). for information on antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs in patients with acute coronary syndromes and ST-elevation myocardial infarction (including dual antiplatelet therapy duration after ACS/STEMI), see Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for acute coronary syndromes and Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors recommended indefinitely, unless contraindicated, for all patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and any of (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A). left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40%. hypertension. diabetes. chronic kidney disease. reasonable to use ACE inhibitors in all other patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). ACE inhibitors associated with lower rates of mortality, myocardial infarction, and hospital admission for heart failure in patients with CAD WITH and WITHOUT left ventricular dysfunction or heart failure (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) recommended for patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A if heart failure, ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B for other patients). aldosterone blockade recommended for postmyocardial infarction patients with all of (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). heart failure and/or diabetes. already receiving therapeutic doses of ACE inhibitor plus beta blocker. left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40%. no significant renal dysfunction. no hyperkalemia. beta blockers recommended, unless contraindicated, for patients with. heart failure or prior myocardial infarction with left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40% (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A); beta blockers for at least 6 months may reduce mortality after myocardial infarction (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) although not statistically significant in contemporary observational study (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40% without heart failure or prior myocardial infarction (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). prior acute coronary syndrome with normal left ventricular function (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). all other patients with coronary or other vascular disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). antihypertensive therapies. target blood pressure < 140/90 mm Hg recommended for most patients; in patients with CAD reaching systolic blood pressure ≤ 130 mm Hg appears associated with reduced risk of heart failure and stroke but increased risk of hypotension (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). initial antihypertensive drug choice suggestions include use of ACE inhibitors in patients with CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence) and beta blockers following myocardial infarction (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). annual influenza vaccination recommended (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). interventions that are not recommended for secondary prevention include. hormone replacement therapy (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin E and/or vitamin C supplements (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). folic acid (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). usefulness of chelation therapy (IV infusion of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA]) for reducing cardiovascular events uncertain in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B). see Secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. for use of PCSK9 inhibitors in combination with diet and maximally-tolerated statin therapy in adults with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease who require additional lowering of LDL cholesterol see Hypercholesterolemia.
_Management|Medications|Antibiotics without efficacy for treating cardiovascular disease|Efficacy of antichlamydial therapy
antichlamydial antibiotics may not reduce mortality or rate of myocardial infarction (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on systematic review without reporting of individual trial quality measures. systematic review of 11 randomized, placebo-controlled trials of antichlamydial antibiotic therapy in 19,217 patients with CAD that reported all-cause mortality, myocardial infarction, or unstable angina. comparing use of antibiotics vs. no use of antibiotics. all-cause mortality 4.7% vs. 4.6% (not significant). myocardial infarction in 5% vs. 5.4% (not significant). combined end point of myocardial infarction and unstable angina in 9.2% vs. 9.6% (not significant). Reference -. similar results found in systematic review of 9 randomized trials evaluating antibiotics vs. placebo in 12,032 patients with acute coronary syndrome or stable coronary artery disease (, commentary can be found in ). editorial commentary can be found in. editorial review concludes insufficient evidence to support antichlamydial antibiotics in CAD ().
_Management|Medications|Antibiotics without efficacy for treating cardiovascular disease|Efficacy of azithromycin
azithromycin for 1 year does not reduce risk of cardiac events in patients with coronary artery disease (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on randomized trial. 4,012 patients with stable coronary artery disease (angiographic stenosis at least 50%, or history of myocardial infarction or coronary revascularization at least 3 months prior) were randomized to azithromycin 600 mg vs. placebo weekly for 1 year, mean follow-up 3.9 years with 98% follow-up. comparing azithromycin vs. placebo (all not significant). coronary heart disease mortality 3.2% vs. 3.7%. myocardial infarction in 6.8% vs. 6.5%. coronary revascularization in 19% vs. 18.4%. hospitalization for unstable angina in 2.5% vs. 2.7%. composite of any of these outcomes in 22.3% vs. 22.4%. overall mortality 7.1% vs. 6.6%. stroke in 2.2% vs. 2%. no differences in any subgroup analyzed; significant adverse effects included nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and hearing loss. Reference - ACES trial ( ), editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. azithromycin taken for 3 months may reduce inflammatory markers but not cardiovascular events at 6 months (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on randomized trial. 302 patients with coronary artery disease who were seropositive for Chlamydia randomized to azithromycin (500 mg/day for 3 days then 500 mg/week for 3 months) vs. placebo. 4 inflammatory markers were reduced at 6 months with azithromycin but not placebo. no significant differences in number of clinical cardiovascular events. comparing azithromycin vs. placebo, adverse events occurred in 24% with azithromycin vs. 11% with placebo, most commonly GI upset. Reference - ACADEMIC trial ( ). azithromycin for 3 months did not reduce cardiovascular events at 2 years (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on follow-up of ACADEMIC trial. 302 patients from ACADEMIC trial included in 2-year follow-up. no significant difference in combined endpoint of cardiovascular death, cardiac arrest, myocardial infarction, stroke, unstable angina or unplanned coronary revascularization. delayed benefit could not be confidently ruled out. Reference -.
_Management|Medications|Antibiotics without efficacy for treating cardiovascular disease|Efficacy of clarithromycin
clarithromycin for 2 weeks increases cardiovascular mortality at 3 years in patients with coronary artery disease (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on randomized trial. 4,373 patients aged 18-85 years with history of myocardial infarction, angina or coronary revascularization were randomized to clarithromycin 500 mg vs. placebo orally once daily for 2 weeks. outcomes comparing clarithromycin vs. placebo at 3 years (mean follow-up 960 days). all-cause mortality 9.8% vs. 7.8% (p = 0.03, NNH 50). cardiovascular mortality 5.1% vs. 3.5% (p = 0.01, NNH 62). myocardial infarction or unstable angina in 7.4% vs. 6.7%. death, myocardial infarction or unstable angina in 15.8% vs. 13.8% (p = 0.08, NNH 50). cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction or unstable angina in 11.5% vs. 9.9% (p = 0.09, NNH 50). cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, unstable angina, stroke or peripheral vascular disease in 16.2% vs. 13.7% (p = 0.03, NNH 40). clarithromycin group more likely to be smokers (37.7% vs. 34.2% of placebo group), but significant differences in outcomes persisted in adjusted analyses. Reference - CLARICOR trial ( , correction in BMJ 2006 Jan 21;332(7534):151), commentary can be found in.
_Management|Medications|Antibiotics without efficacy for treating cardiovascular disease|Efficacy of roxithromycin
roxithromycin 300 mg once daily for 28 days does not reduce risk for restenosis, revascularization, myocardial infarction or mortality at 1 year after coronary stent implantation (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on randomized trial. 1,010 patients with successful coronary stenting randomized to roxithromycin 300 mg once daily vs. placebo for 28 days. comparing roxithromycin vs. placebo (all not significant). restenosis ≥ 50% in 31% vs. 29%. restenosis ≥ 70% in 19% vs. 17%. target vessel revascularization in 19% vs. 17%. combined outcome of mortality or myocardial infarction in 3.2% vs. 2.6%. roxithromycin associated with nonsignificant improvement in restenosis and target vessel revascularization in subgroup of patients with high Chlamydia pneumoniae antibody titers. Reference - , commentary can be found in. roxithromycin may reduce atherosclerotic progression in patients with Chlamydia pneumoniae antibodies (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). based on nonclinical outcome in randomized trial. 272 patients > 55 years old with ischemic stroke were randomized to roxithromycin 150 mg vs. placebo orally twice daily for 30 days. roxithromycin associated with significantly reduced rate of atherosclerotic progression in seropositive patients. no significant differences in. cardiovascular events at 2-year follow-up. atherosclerosis progression in seronegative patients based on intima-to-media thickness of common carotid artery. Reference -.
_Management|Surgery and procedures|Coronary revascularization
indications. for patients with stable coronary artery disease. left main coronary artery disease (CAD) revascularization. coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) recommended to improve survival in patients with significant (≥ 50% diameter stenosis) left main coronary artery stenosis (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). PCI as alternative to CABG to improve survival in stable patients with significant (≥ 50% diameter stenosis) unprotected left main CAD. reasonable in selected stable patients with (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). anatomic conditions associated with low risk of PCI procedural complications and high likelihood of good long-term outcome (for example, low SYNTAX score [≤ 22] or ostial or trunk left main CAD). clinical characteristics predicting significantly increased risk of adverse surgical outcomes (for example, STS-predicted risk of operative mortality ≥ 5%). may be reasonable in selected stable patients with (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). anatomic conditions associated with low-to-intermediate risk of PCI procedural complications and intermediate-to-high likelihood of good long-term outcome (for example, low-intermediate SYNTAX score < 33, bifurcation left main CAD). clinical characteristics predicting increased risk of adverse surgical outcomes (for example, moderate-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, disability from previous stroke, or previous cardiac surgery; STS-predicted risk of operative mortality > 2%). multivessel revascularization. CABG is beneficial to improve survival in patients with significant (> 70% diameter) stenoses in 3 major coronary arteries or in proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery plus 1 other major coronary artery (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). CABG generally recommended in preference to PCI to improve survival in patients with multivessel CAD and diabetes mellitus, especially if LIMA graft can be anastomosed to LAD artery (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). CABG to improve survival reasonable in patients with (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). significant (> 70% diameter) stenoses in 2 major coronary arteries with severe or extensive myocardial ischemia or with target vessels supplying a large area of viable myocardium. mild-moderate left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction [EF] 35%-50%) and significant (≥ 70% diameter stenosis) multi-vessel CAD or proximal LAD coronary artery stenosis, when viable myocardium present in region of intended revascularization. choosing CABG over PCI to improve survival reasonable in patients with complex 3-vessel CAD (for example, SYNTAX score > 22), with or without proximal LAD artery involvement who are good candidates for CABG (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). other conditions with mortality benefit associated with revascularization. in patients who are survivors of sudden cardiac death with presumed ischemia-mediated ventricular tachycardia caused by significant (> 70% diameter) stenosis in a major coronary artery, CABG (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B) or PCI (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C) beneficial to improve survival. in patients with significant (> 70% diameter) stenosis in proximal LAD artery and evidence of extensive ischemia, CABG with left internal mammary artery (LIMA) graft to improve survival reasonable (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). in patients with stable ischemic heart disease with severe LV systolic dysfunction (EF < 35%) whether or not viable myocardium is present, CABG might be considered with primary or sole intent of improving survival (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). uncertain mortality benefit for. CABG in patients with significant (> 70%) diameter stenoses in 2 major coronary arteries not involving proximal LAD artery and without extensive ischemia (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). PCI in patients with 2- or 3-vessel CAD (with or without proximal LAD artery involvement) or 1-vessel proximal LAD disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). do not perform CABG or PCI with primary or sole intent to improve survival in patients with stable ischemic heart disease involving only left circumflex or right coronary artery (ACCF/AHA Class III Harm, Level B). for patients with refractory angina. patients with at least 1 significant (≥ 70% diameter) coronary artery stenoses and unacceptable angina on ≥ 2 anti-anginal medications. CABG or PCI to improve symptoms beneficial if stenoses amenable to revascularization and unacceptable angina despite guideline-directed medical therapy (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A). CABG or PCI to improve symptoms reasonable when guideline-directed medical therapy cannot be implemented because of medication contraindications, adverse effects, or patient preferences (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). reasonable to choose CABG over PCI to improve symptoms in patients with complex 3-vessel CAD (for example, SYNTAX score > 22), with or without involvement of proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery who are good candidates for CABG (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). patients with previous CABG. PCI to improve symptoms reasonable in patients with previous CABG, ≥ 1 significant (≥ 70% diameter) coronary artery stenoses associated with ischemia, and unacceptable angina despite guideline-directed medical therapy (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). CABG to improve symptoms might be reasonable for patients with previous CABG, ≥ 1 significant (≥ 70% diameter) coronary artery stenoses not amenable to PCI, and unacceptable angina despite guideline-directed medical therapy (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). do not perform CABG or PCI to improve symptoms in patients who do not meet anatomic (> 50% diameter left main or > 70% non-left main stenosis diameter) or physiologic (such as abnormal fractional flow reserve) criteria for revascularization (ACCF/AHA Class III Harm, Level C). do not perform PCI with coronary stenting if patient unlikely to be able to tolerate and comply with dual antiplatelet therapy for appropriate duration of treatment based on type of stent implanted (ACCF/AHA Class III Harm, Level B). in patients with a patent left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to LAD artery and ischemia in distribution of right or left circumflex coronary arteries, CABG to treat angina reasonable if guideline-directed medical therapy failed and coronary stenoses not amenable to PCI (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). for patients with acute coronary syndromes. refractory angina, hemodynamic instability, or electrical instability (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). initially stabilized patients with unstable angina or non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) who have elevated risk for clinical events (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). for patients with STEMI. indications for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). perform primary PCI in patients within 12 hours onset of STEMI (ACCF/AHA/SCAI Class I, Level A). primary PCI preferred over fibrinolysis when time-to-treatment delays are short and procedure can be done in a high-volume, well-equipped facility staffed with expert interventional cardiologists and skilled support staff. primary PCI reasonable in patients with STEMI if clinical and/or electrocardiographic evidence of ongoing ischemia between 12-24 hours after symptom onset (ACCF/AHA/SCAI Class IIa, Level B). perform primary PCI as soon as possible in patients with STEMI who develop severe heart failure or cardiogenic shock and are suitable candidates for revascularization, irrespective of time delay (ACCF/AHA/SCAI Class I, Level B). consider primary PCI in asymptomatic patients with STEMI and higher risk presenting between 12-24 hours after symptom onset (ACCF/AHA/SCAI Class IIb, Level C). indications for emergency or urgent coronary artery bypass graft. failed PCI with persistent pain or hemodynamic instability and coronary anatomy suitable for surgery (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). persistent or recurrent ischemia refractory to medical therapy (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). planned repair of postinfarction ventricular septal rupture (VSR) or mitral valve insufficiency (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). life threatening ventricular arrhythmias in presence of ≥ 50% left main stenosis and/or triple-vessel disease (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). for cardiogenic shock, coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) indicated for patients < 75 years old (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A) and for selected patients ≥ 75 years old (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level B). efficacy. for efficacy in patients with acute coronary syndrome, see Revascularization for acute coronary syndromes. for efficacy in patients with STEMI, see Revascularization for STEMI. in patients with stable coronary artery disease. revascularization (surgical or percutaneous) may decrease mortality in patients with completed myocardial infarction (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). CABG may reduce mortality in high-risk and moderate-risk patients with stable coronary heart disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). PCI does not appear to reduce death or myocardial infarction more than medical therapy for treatment of nonacute coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). comparative efficacy (PCI vs. CABG). PCI consistently associated with higher rates of repeat revascularization compared to CABG. effects on survival. coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) does not improve overall survival compared to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in most populations, but CABG increases rates of freedom from angina in selected populations (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). CABG and PCI associated with similar overall mortality in patients with multivessel coronary artery disease, but CABG associated with greater angina relief at 1 year (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). CABG associated with improved survival in patients with multivessel disease and diabetes (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). CABG associated with lower mortality than PCI after 2-4 years in older patients with multivessel coronary artery disease treated electively (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). in patients with left main coronary artery stenosis, PCI with drug-eluting stent increases risk of repeat revascularization but reduces risk of stroke compared to CABG (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence), PCI might have lower mortality but higher risk for myocardial infarction (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). in patients with lesion of LAD, CABG associated with similar rates of mortality and myocardial infarction compared to PCI with stenting (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). CABG associated with reduced risk of death and repeat revascularization compared to PCI in patients with multivessel coronary artery disease, left ventricular dysfunction, and diabetes mellitus. based on prospective cohort study. 2,837 patients (mean age 65 years) with multivessel coronary artery disease (CAD), left ventricular dysfunction, and diabetes mellitus who had PCI (55%) or CABG (45%) were followed for mean 5.5 years. propensity score for likelihood of having CABG calculated for each patient based on demographic and clinical factors. 869 patients having PCI and 869 propensity score-matched patients having CABG were analyzed. comparing PCI vs. CABG in patients with ejection fraction 35%-49% in propensity score-matched analysis. PCI associated with. increased mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 1.34, 95% CI 1.07-1.68). increased risk of repeat revascularization (HR 5.46, 95% CI 3.8-7.78). no significant difference in risk of stroke or myocardial infarction. consistent results for mortality, risk of repeat revascularization, and stroke in patients with ejection fraction < 35%. PCI associated with increased risk of myocardial infarction in patients with ejection fraction < 35% compared to CABG in propensity score-matched analysis (HR 2.27, 95% CI 1.38-3.75). Reference - , editorial can be found in. transmyocardial revascularization. transmyocardial laser revascularization may reduce angina severity and improve quality of life in patients with angina, but might increase mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). transmyocardial revascularization performed as adjunct to CABG to improve symptoms may be reasonable in patients with viable ischemic myocardium perfused by arteries not amenable to grafting (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). see Revascularization for coronary artery disease (CAD) for details. see also. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG). multidisciplinary program during waiting period for CABG in Canada may improve quality of life and reduce inpatient course (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial without attention control. 249 patients waiting for first CABG surgery who were able to exercise and had ejection fractions > 40% were randomized to multidisciplinary program vs. control group during waiting period. mean time on waiting list 11 weeks. intervention consisted of individualized education about risk factors, supervised personalized aerobic and stretching exercise sessions for 90 minutes twice weekly, and monthly telephone calls. intervention group associated with significantly greater improvement in physical, but not mental, health-related quality of life during waiting period and for at least 6 months after CABG. median durations were significantly shorter for length of hospital stay (6 vs. 7 days), postoperative stay (5 vs. 6 days) and intensive care unit (ICU) stay (25 vs. 27 hours). study did not evaluate delaying surgery to conduct this program, but rather used delays already present in Canada. Reference -.
_Management|Surgery and procedures|Perioperative cardiac management for noncardiac surgery
preoperative risk assessment includes evaluation of clinical risk factors, use of risk calculators (such as the Perioperative Cardiac Risk Calculator and Revised Cardiac Risk Index), and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) testing. risk assessment may also include preoperative cardiac evaluation tests. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommends preoperative echocardiography in patients with clinically suspected moderate or severe valvular stenosis or regurgitation if prior echocardiogram > 1 year or significant change in clinical or physical exam (ACC/AHA Class I, Level C). electrocardiography. recommended for patients with clinical risk factors who are having intermediate- or high-risk surgery (ESC/ESA Class I, Level C), but not recommended for routine testing in patients without clinical risk factors who are having low-risk surgery (ESC/ESA Class III, Level B). reasonable in patients with known coronary artery disease or other significant heart disease if having intermediate- or high-risk surgical procedures (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level B), but not recommended in asymptomatic patients having low-risk surgical procedures (ACC/AHA Class III, Level B). evaluation of left ventricular function reasonable for patients with current heart failure or dyspnea (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level C) and may be considered in asymptomatic patients having high-risk surgery (ESC/ESA Class IIb, Level C), but not recommended in asymptomatic patients having low- or intermediate-risk surgery (ESC/ESA Class III, Level C). preoperative noninvasive cardiac stress testing. recommended for patients with > 2 clinical risk factors and poor functional capacity (< 4 metabolic equivalents [METs]) who are having high-risk surgery (ESC/ESA Class I, Level B). may be reasonable for patients with elevated risk and unknown functional capacity if it will change management (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B), but not recommended for routine testing in patients having low-risk surgical procedures (ACC/AHA Class III, Level B; ESC/ESA Class III, Level C). might be associated with improved 1-year survival in patients having intermediate- to high-risk noncardiac surgery (level 2 [mid-level] evidence), but observational data not validated in randomized trials. preoperative noninvasive pharmacologic stress test with imaging reasonable for patients with elevated risk and poor functional capacity (ACA/AHA Class IIa, Level B), but routine screening is not useful for patients having low-risk surgical procedures (ACC/AHA Class III, Level B). preoperative coronary angiography in medium- to high-risk patients may improve survival after major vascular surgery (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) and recommended in patients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (ESC/ESA Class I, Level A), but routine coronary angiography is not recommended (ACC/AHA Class III, Level C), especially in stable cardiac patients having low-risk surgery (ESC/ESA Class III, Level C). preoperative management. cardiac interventions before surgery. preoperative coronary revascularization with coronary artery bypass graft recommended for some high-risk patients (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B), but coronary artery revascularization before major vascular surgery may not affect long-term mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). prophylactic myocardial revascularization may be considered for patients having high-risk surgery but depends on extent of stress-induced perfusion defect (ESC/ESA Class IIb, Level B). elective noncardiac surgery after stent implantation. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommendations. do not perform elective noncardiac surgery within 30 days after bare metal stent (BMS) implantation or within 3 months after drug-eluting stent (DES) implantation in patients for whom dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) will need to be discontinued perioperatively (ACC/AHA Class III Harm, Level B-NR). delay elective noncardiac surgery 30 days after BMS implantation and optimally 6 months after DES implantation (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B-NR). elective noncardiac surgery after DES implantation may be considered after 3 months in patients for whom P2Y12 inhibitor therapy will need to be discontinued if risk of further delay of surgery is greater than expected risks of stent thrombosis (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C-EO). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommendations. consider elective surgery requiring discontinuation of P2Y12 inhibitor after 1 month (irrespective of stent type) if aspirin can be maintained throughout perioperative period after implantation of coronary stent (ESC Class IIa, Level B). consider postponing elective surgery for up to 6 months in patients with recent myocardial infarction or other high ischemic risk features requiring DAPT (ESC Class IIb, Level C). perioperative and intraoperative management. perioperative monitoring with pulmonary artery catheter may be considered for patients with heart failure, severe valvular heart disease, or combined shock states (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C), but routine perioperative use of PAC not recommended, even if patients at elevated risk (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). perioperative maintenance of normothermia may be reasonable (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B) and may reduce rate of perioperative morbid cardiac events (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). volatile anesthetic agents or total IV anesthesia is reasonable but the choice should be determined by other factors not including the prevention of myocardial ischemia and myocardial infarction (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level A). neuraxial anesthesia (also known as spinal or epidural) may be considered for perioperative anesthesia or postoperative analgesia if not contraindicated (ESC/ESA Class IIb, Level B). perioperative medications. beta blockers. continuing beta blockers is recommended in patients having surgery who are receiving beta blockers for treatment of chronic conditions (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B; ESC/ESA Class I, Level B). initiating beta blockers. perioperatively in patients with intermediate- or high-risk myocardial ischemia may be reasonable (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). prior to surgery in patients with > 3 revised cardiac risk index (RCRI) risk factors may be reasonable (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B). for control of preoperative tachycardia or hypertension may be considered; reduction in myocardial infarction rates with perioperative beta blockers may be limited to patients achieving maximal heart rate (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). may be considered in patients with ≥ 2 clinical risk factors or American Society of Anesthesiologists status ≥ 3 who are having high-risk surgery or patients with known ischemic heart disease or myocardial ischemia (ESC/ESA Class IIb, Level B). perioperative beta blockers might increase mortality, hypotension, and cerebrovascular adverse events in adults having noncardiac surgery (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). in largest trial, high-dose perioperative metoprolol extended-release for high-risk patients having noncardiac surgery decreased risk for myocardial infarction (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence) but appeared to increase mortality, stroke, hypotension, and bradycardia (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and (angiotensin receptor blockers) ARBs. continuing use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers perioperatively is reasonable (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level B). if angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers are withheld prior to surgery, it is reasonable to restart postoperatively as soon as clinically feasible (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level C). consider continuation of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers under close monitoring for stable patients with heart failure and left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ESC/ESA Class IIa, Level C). consider initiating ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers at least 1 week before surgery in stable patients with heart failure and left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ESC/ESA Class IIa, Level C). consider transient discontinuation of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers before non-cardiac surgery in hypertensive patients (ESC/ESA Class IIa, Level C). other perioperative medications. alpha-2 adrenergic agonists. inconsistent evidence for effect on mortality in patients with cardiovascular risk having noncardiac surgery. use of alpha-2 adrenergic agonists not recommended for prevention of cardiac events in patients having noncardiac surgery (ACC/AHA Class III, Level B). statins. continue statins for patients currently taking statins and scheduled for noncardiac surgery (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B; ESC/ESA Class I, Level C). statin use. perioperative initiation is reasonable if having vascular surgery (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level B), consider initiating preoperative statin therapy preferably ≥ 2 weeks prior to surgery (ESC/ESA Class IIa, Level B). may be considered for patients with ≥ 1 clinical risk factors having elevated-risk procedures (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy, short-term high-dose statin therapy may be considered in patients with moderate or moderate-to-severe chronic kidney disease (ESC/ESA Class IIa, Level B). perioperative statins as drug class may reduce (level 2 [mid-level] evidence), and fluvastatin specifically reduces perioperative cardiovascular risk in patients having noncardiac vascular surgery (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). antiplatelet agents. continuation of aspirin not recommended unless recent coronary artery stent or undergoing carotid endarterectomy (CCS Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence). do not perform elective noncardiac surgery within 30 days after bare metal stent (BMS) implantation or within 3 months after drug-eluting stent (DES) implantation in patients for whom dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) will need to be discontinued perioperatively (ACC/AHA Class III Harm, Level B-NR). consider elective surgery requiring discontinuation of P2Y12 inhibitor after 1 month (irrespective of stent type) if aspirin can be maintained throughout perioperative period after implantation of coronary stent (ESC Class IIa, Level B). consider postponing elective surgery for up to 6 months in patients with recent myocardial infarction or other high ischemic risk features requiring DAPT (ESC Class IIb, Level C). consider discontinuation of P2Y12 inhibitors ≥ 3 days before surgery for ticagrelor, ≥ 5 days for clopidogrel, and ≥ 7 days for prasugrel (ESC Class IIa, Level B). prophylaxis with antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs may not reduce myocardial infarction during noncardiac vascular surgery (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). perioperative nitroglycerin IV as a prophylactic agent to prevent myocardial ischemia in patients having noncardiac surgery is not effective (ACC/AHA Class III, Level B). continuous insulin infusion may reduce perioperative cardiovascular events after vascular surgery (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). see Perioperative cardiac management for noncardiac surgery for details.
_Management|Secondary prevention of CAD
recommendations for secondary prevention of coronary artery disease (CAD) are synthesized from recommendations of American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA), European Society of Cardiology (ESC), and National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE); generally in agreement and details are provided where inconsistent. comprehensive cardiovascular rehabilitation program (including exercise, education, and facilitation of risk reduction strategies). recommended for all patients with CAD in ESC and NICE guidelines. recommended by ACCF/AHA for patients following coronary revascularization (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A) or diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A), non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B), peripheral artery disease (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A), chronic angina (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). suggested by ACCF/AHA in clinically stable patients with heart failure ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B. associated with reduced total and cardiac mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). dietary recommendations include. limiting intake of saturated fats (< 7%-10%) and trans-fatty acids (< 1%) (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B; (level 2 [mid-level] evidence)). increased consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B;(level 2 [mid-level] evidence) and fish (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). limiting alcohol consumption to < 2-3 drinks/day in men or < 1-2 drinks/day in women. sodium restriction (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B;(level 3 [lacking direct] evidence) (< 5 g/day). increased dietary fiber intake (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) (30-35 g/day). physical activity. aerobic physical activity uniformly recommended (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B;(level 2 [mid-level] evidence) with recommended durations ranging from 20 minutes to 60 minutes/day and recommended frequency ranging from ≥ 3 times/week to 7 days/week. gradual increase in physical activity (light-intensity exercise or supplementing daily lifestyle activities) recommended for sedentary patients. consider resistance training ≥ 2 days/week (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level C). sexual activity is reasonable for patients at low risk of cardiovascular complications (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level B) and who can exercise without ischemic manifestations (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level C). weight management - achieve and maintain (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). body mass index (BMI) 18.5-24.9 kg/m. waist circumference < 40 inches (102 cm) for men, < 35 inches (89 cm) for women. diabetes management may include consideration of target HbA1c < 7% (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). smoking. at every visit, advise every tobacco user to quit (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A). avoid environmental exposure (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). assist with smoking cessation support (counseling, pharmacotherapy, and/or smoking cessation services) (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A). lipid management. ACC/AHA recommends ≥ 50% reduction in LDL cholesterol; ESC recommends low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol < 1.8 mmol/L (< 70 mg/dL); NICE recommends > 40% reduction in non-high-density lipoprotein (non-HDL) cholesterol. statin therapy. ACC/AHA recommends high-intensity statin with goal LDL cholesterol reduction ≥ 50% in patients ≤ 75 years old (AHA/ACC Class I, Level A), and suggests moderate- or high-intensity statin in patients > 75 years old after evaluating risks and benefits of therapy high-intensity statin therapy (AHA/ACC Class IIa, Level B-R). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommends statins in all patients with stable coronary artery disease (ESC Class I, Level A). NICE recommends starting with atorvastatin 80 mg/day, or lower dose if potential drug interactions or high risk of adverse effects. statins reduce mortality, myocardial infarction, and stroke in adults with CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence), although reduction of mortality and stroke in women is based on limited data (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). non-statin therapies. consider adding ezetimibe to maximally-tolerated statin therapy in patients with LDL-C ≥ 70 mg/dL (≥ 1.8 mmol/L) who are at very high risk (AHA/ACC Class IIa, Level B-R). consider adding PCSK9 inhibitor after evaluating risks and benefits of therapy in patients at very high risk with LDL-C ≥ 70 mg/dL (≥ 1.8 mmol/L) or non-HDL-C level ≥ 100 mg/dL (≥ 2.6 mmol/L) despite maximally tolerated combination therapy of a statin with ezetimibe (AHA/ACC Class IIa, Level A). fibric acid derivatives may reduce coronary mortality and myocardial infarction in some patients with CAD (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). antiplatelet therapy. aspirin 75-162 mg/day recommended for all patients with CAD unless contraindicated (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A). clopidogrel 75 mg once daily recommended as alternative for patients intolerant of or allergic to aspirin (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). duration of therapy of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) after stent placement in patients with stable ischemic heart disease/stable coronary artery disease. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommendations. for patients with bare metal stents. give P2Y12 inhibitor therapy using clopidogrel for at least 1 month (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). reasonable to continue DAPT using clopidogrel for > 1 month in patients who have tolerated DAPT without bleeding complication and who are not at high bleeding risk (for example, prior bleeding on DAPT, coagulopathy, oral anticoagulant use) (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level A). for patients with drug eluting stents. give P2Y12 inhibitor therapy using clopidogrel for at least 6 months (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B-R). reasonable to continue DAPT using clopidogrel for > 6 months in patients who have tolerated DAPT without bleeding complication and who are not at high bleeding risk (for example, prior bleeding on DAPT, coagulopathy, oral anticoagulant use) (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level A). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommendations. DAPT consisting of clopidogrel and aspirin generally recommended for 6 months in patients with coronary stent implantation, irrespective of stent type (ESC Class I, Level A). consider DAPT for 3 months in patients with high bleeding risk (for example, ≥ 25) (ESC Class IIa, Level B). consider continuing DAPT with clopidogrel for > 6 months and < 30 months in patients tolerating DAPT without bleeding complication and at low bleeding (but high thrombotic) risk (ESC Class IIb, Level A). consider DAPT for 1 month for patients in whom 3-month DAPT poses safety concerns (ESC Class IIb, Level C). for information on antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs in patients with acute coronary syndromes and ST-elevation myocardial infarction (including dual antiplatelet therapy duration after ACS/STEMI), see Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for acute coronary syndromes and Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors recommended indefinitely, unless contraindicated, for all patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and any of (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A). left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40%. hypertension. diabetes. chronic kidney disease. reasonable to use ACE inhibitors in all other patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). ACE inhibitors associated with lower rates of mortality, myocardial infarction, and hospital admission for heart failure in patients with CAD WITH and WITHOUT left ventricular dysfunction or heart failure (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) recommended for patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A; ESC Class I, Level A if heart failure, ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B for other patients). aldosterone blockade recommended for postmyocardial infarction patients with all of (ACC/AHA Class I, Level A). heart failure and/or diabetes. already receiving therapeutic doses of ACE inhibitor plus beta blocker. left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40%. no significant renal dysfunction. no hyperkalemia. beta blockers recommended, unless contraindicated, for patients with. heart failure or prior myocardial infarction with left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40% (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A); beta blockers for at least 6 months may reduce mortality after myocardial infarction (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) although not statistically significant in contemporary observational study (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 40% without heart failure or prior myocardial infarction (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). prior acute coronary syndrome with normal left ventricular function (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). all other patients with coronary or other vascular disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). antihypertensive therapies. target blood pressure < 140/90 mm Hg recommended for most patients; in patients with CAD reaching systolic blood pressure ≤ 130 mm Hg appears associated with reduced risk of heart failure and stroke but increased risk of hypotension (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). initial antihypertensive drug choice suggestions include use of ACE inhibitors in patients with CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence) and beta blockers following myocardial infarction (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). annual influenza vaccination recommended (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). interventions that are not recommended for secondary prevention include. hormone replacement therapy (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin E and/or vitamin C supplements (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). folic acid (ACC/AHA Class III, Level A). usefulness of chelation therapy (IV infusion of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA]) for reducing cardiovascular events uncertain in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B). see Secondary prevention of coronary artery disease for details.
_Management|Management of angina
for management of patients with unstable angina, see Suspected acute coronary syndrome and Acute coronary syndromes. medications. short-acting nitroglycerin for chest pain. use sublingual nitroglycerin or nitroglycerin spray for immediate relief of angina (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). give sublingual tablets (0.3-0.6 mg) or lingual spray (1-2 sprays [0.4-0.8 mg]), repeat as needed every 5 minutes for up to 3 sublingual tablet doses or 3 lingual sprays in 15-minute period, seek prompt medical attention if pain persists after 3 doses in 15-minute period. beta blockers (examples include carvedilol, metoprolol succinate, bisoprolol) recommended as initial therapy for relief of symptoms in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). calcium channel blockers (examples include verapamil, diltiazem) or long-acting nitrates. use calcium channel blockers or long-acting nitrates for relief of symptoms if beta blockers clearly contraindicated or cause unacceptable adverse events (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). use calcium channel blockers or long-acting nitrates in combination with beta-blockers for relief of symptoms when beta blockers alone are unsuccessful (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). consider long-acting nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (verapamil or diltiazem) instead of beta blocker as initial therapy for relief of symptoms (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). comparative efficacy. beta blockers and calcium channel blockers may have similar clinical outcomes but beta blockers may have fewer adverse events in patients with stable angina (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). long-acting calcium channel blockers often preferred over long-acting nitrates for sustained 24-hour effects, but limited comparative efficacy data. additional antianginal medications. ranolazine. consider ranolazine in place of beta blockers if unacceptable adverse effects, lack of effect, or contraindication with initial treatment with beta blockers (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B), or use in combination with beta blockers when initial treatment with beta blockers is not successful (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). slightly reduces angina frequency (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). nicorandil may reduce composite of cardiac outcomes in patients with stable angina (level 2 [mid-level] evidence)(level 1 [likely reliable] evidence); not available in United States. trimetazidine appears effective for reducing angina frequency (level 2 [mid-level] evidence); available in Europe and over 80 countries worldwide, not available in United States. other medications tested with limited evidence. allopurinol increases time to chest pain and ST-segment depression during exercise test (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence) and may reduce frequency of angina attacks (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). atorvastatin may reduce frequency of angina and nitroglycerin use but may be less effective than amlodipine (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). magnesium supplementation may increase exercise tolerance and quality of life (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). Chinese herbal medications (suxiao jiuxin wan and Shenshao tablets) may reduce angina frequency (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). medications that might reduce nitrate tolerance include atorvastatin, carvedilol, hydralazine, ACE inhibitors, vitamin C, and folic acid. ivabradine increases risk of cardiovascular death and nonfatal myocardial infarction in patients with activity-limiting angina (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). invasive procedures. revascularization - coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). in patients with at least 1 significant (≥ 70% diameter) coronary artery stenoses and unacceptable angina, perform CABG or PCI to improve symptoms if stenoses amenable to revascularization and unacceptable angina despite guideline-directed medical therapy (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A). PCI. PCI reduces risk of additional revascularization and angina but does not reduce mortality or major morbidity in patients with stable coronary disease (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). PCI associated with greater angina relief than medical therapy alone, but differences may be associated with time period of recruitment (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). in adults with stable angina and single-vessel stenosis who are receiving optimized medical therapy, PCI with drug-eluting stent may not increase exercise capacity at 6 weeks (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). CABG and PCI may have similar reduction in rates of angina at 1 year in patients with symptomatic multivessel disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) but CABG has lower rates of angina at hospital discharge and higher risk of procedure-related infarction (level 3 [lacking direct] evidence). transmyocardial revascularization (TMR). consider transmyocardial revascularization for relief of incapacitating, medically refractory angina if no other feasible therapeutic alternatives in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). for refractory angina may reduce angina severity but might increase mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). spinal cord stimulation. consider spinal cord stimulation for relief of angina refractory to medical therapy and coronary revascularization in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). might improve exercise capacity and quality of life in patients with refractory angina (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). coronary-sinus reducing device may improve symptoms in adults with refractory angina ineligible for revascularization (level 2 [mid-level] evidence) by increasing intracoronary pressure. endomyocardial implantation of bone marrow cells may increase exercise time and reduce New York Heart Association (NYHA) class in patients with severe coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). other management. exercise. encourage 30-60 minutes of moderate intensity aerobic activity (for example, brisk walking) at least 5 days (preferably 7 days) per week with an increase in daily lifestyle activities (for example, gardening, walking breaks at work) to improve cardiorespiratory fitness in all patients (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). medically supervised programs (cardiac rehabilitation) and physician-directed, home-based programs recommended at first diagnosis for at-risk patients (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level A). exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation associated with reduced total and cardiac mortality after 1 year (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). nurse-led cardiac rehabilitation may improve walking performance (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). risk factor modification includes weight control, blood pressure control, smoking cessation, diabetes control, adherence to healthy diet, and management of depression and stress. enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP). consider EECP for relief of refractory angina in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B). might reduce frequency of angina episodes (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). wide applicability may be influenced by patient adherence and/or coverage. cognitive-behavioral self-management program reduces frequency of anginal episodes (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). telehome care may reduce hospital readmission rates in patients with angina and improve quality of life for patients with heart failure or angina (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). yoga lifestyle intervention may reduce anginal symptoms and may be associated with regression of coronary artery lesions (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). avoid acupuncture for purpose of improving symptoms or reducing cardiovascular risk in patients with stable ischemic heart disease and refractory angina (ACCF/AHA Class III Harm, Level C). routine follow-up includes monitoring of symptoms, clinical function, complications, screening for comorbidities, and ECG testing. see Management of stable angina for more details.
_Management|Other management|Assessment of fitness for specific activities
Canadian Cardiovascular Society Consensus Conference recommendations on driving and flying for cardiac patients. driving recommendations. no restrictions on resuming private or commercial driving in patients with stable angina or asymptomatic CAD. for patients having percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). private driving restricted for 48 hours after PCI. commercial driving restricted for 7 days after PCI. for patients having coronary artery bypass graft (CABG). private driving restricted for 1 month after CABG or longer depending on sternal wound healing. commercial driving restricted for 3 months after CABG or longer depending on sternal wound healing. flying recommendations. for patients with angina pectoris. if New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class I-II, no restrictions. if NYHA functional class III, supplemental oxygen required while flying. if NYHA functional class IV, only if medically necessary and accompanied by physician. for patients post-myocardial infarction (MI). if NYHA functional class I, flying restricted for. 1-2 weeks for repatriation if uncomplicated and successfully revascularized or low risk by noninvasive studies or angiography. 6-8 weeks for elected travel. if NYHA functional class II-IV, only if medically necessary and accompanied by physician. for patients having CABG and NYHA functional class I-II, flying restricted for. 4 days after CABG if flight < 2 hours long and hemoglobin ≥ 90 g/L. 7 days after CABG if flight ≥ 2 hours long and hemoglobin ≥ 90 g/L. for patients having PCI or atrial septal defect closure and NYHA functional class I-II, flying restricted for 1 day after PCI. Reference - Can J Cardiol 2004;20(13):1313 PDF.
_Management|Other management|Music
listening to music may reduce anxiety and pain in patients with coronary heart disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on Cochrane review limited by heterogeneity. systematic review of 26 randomized trials evaluating addition of music to standard care in 1,369 patients with coronary heart disease. music was evaluated in patients having cardiac surgery and procedures (14 trials), cardiac rehabilitation (5 trials), and myocardial infarction (7 trials). addition of music to standard care associated with. reduced anxiety in analysis of 10 trials with 353 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. reduced pain in analysis of 8 trials with 630 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. reduced psychological distress in analysis of 5 trials with 228 patients. improved quality of sleep in analysis of 2 trials with 122 patients. no significant differences in depression in analysis of 6 trials with 217 patients. Reference -.
_Management|Other management|Bone marrow stem cell transplant
autologous adult bone marrow-derived stem cells may decrease mortality in patients with ischemic heart disease or heart failure (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on Cochrane review of trials with low event rates and without significant differences in high-quality trials. systematic review of 38 randomized trials evaluating autologous adult bone marrow-derived stem cell (BMSC) therapy in 1,907 patients with ischemic heart disease or heart failure, excluding patients with acute myocardial infarction. comparing autologous adult BMSC to control (placebo or no intervention). at ≥ 12 months, autologous adult BMSC associated with. reduced all-cause mortality in analysis of 21 trials with 1,010 patients. risk ratio (RR) 0.38 (95% CI 0.25-0.58). NNT 9-16 with all-cause mortality 15% of control groups. BMSC associated with nonsignificant reduction in mortality in 2 high-quality trials. mortality ranged from 0% to 39% in control groups, no deaths reported in either group in 5 trials. reduced risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction (RR 0.4, 95% CI 0.17-0.93) in analysis of 9 trials with 461 patients. nonsignificant reduction in rehospitalization for heart failure (RR 0.62, 95% CI 0.36-1.04) in analysis of 10 trials with 495 patients. at < 12 months, autologous adult BMSC associated with. reduced all-cause mortality in analysis of 33 trials with 1,637 patients. RR 0.48 (95% CI 0.26-0.87). mortality ranged from 0% to 15% in control groups, no deaths reported in either group in 18 trials. adverse effects associated with administration of autologous adult BMSC were infrequent and typically not serious. Reference -. see Bone marrow stem cell treatment for myocardial infarction for additional information.
_Management|Follow-up
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommendations for follow-up. routine follow-up. all patients with stable ischemic heart disease should be evaluated at least annually (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). assess patient's symptoms and clinical functioning. evaluate patient for possible complications, such as heart failure and arrhythmias. monitor cardiac risk factors. assess adequacy of and adherence to recommended lifestyle modifications and medical therapy. for patients with new or worsening heart failure or evidence of myocardial infarction, perform echocardiography or radionucleotide imaging to assess left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and segmental wall motion (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level C). for patients with stable symptoms, consider performing resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) ≥ every 1 year (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). consider periodic screening for diabetes mellitus, depression, and chronic kidney disease (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). for patients with no change in clinical status or patients at low risk for cardiac events, assessment of LVEF unnecessary (ACCF/AHA Class III, Level C). follow-up for patients with new, recurrent, or worsening symptoms not consistent with unstable angina. perform standard exercise ECG for patients with ≥ moderate physical functioning and interpretable ECG (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). perform exercise test with nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI).
_Complications and Prognosis|Complications
common complications include. acute coronary syndrome. ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). acute heart failure. sudden cardiac death. atrial flutter. atrial fibrillation. potent triggers of ischemia in cohort study of 63 patients (mean age 63 years) with CAD and documented ischemia with ambulatory electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring for 24-48 hours. anti-ischemic medications withheld in most patients. triggers of ischemia included strenuous physical activity, intense anger, and smoking. ischemia most frequent during moderately intense physical and mental activities. percentage of time in ischemia was 5% during high-level physical and mental activity vs. 0.2% during low-intensity activities (no p value reported). Reference -. CAD associated with faster progression of carotid atherosclerosis ( ). patients with established vascular disease have 15%-21% rates of cardiovascular complications within 1 year. based on prospective cohort study. 55,814 patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), peripheral artery disease (PAD), or cerebrovascular disease followed for 1 year. rates of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction (MI), or stroke. 4.52% for patients with CAD. 5.35% for patients with PAD. 6.47% for patients with cerebrovascular disease. rates of cardiovascular death, MI, stroke, or hospitalization for atherothrombotic event. 15.2% for patients with CAD. 21.14% for patients with PAD. 14.53% for patients with cerebrovascular disease. Reference - , editorial can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Overall risk for major adverse cardiac events
prevalence of major adverse cardiac events associated with coronary artery disease. 380,000 deaths in United States in 2010. leading cause of death in men and women. > 1.5 million myocardial infarctions annually. majority of mortality and morbidity attributed to cardiac disease. mortality rates after MI without effective treatment are 5% annually after first MI and 10% annually after subsequent MI. based on systematic review. systematic review of 23 prospective studies following 14,211 patients with myocardial infarction (MI). analysis restricted to follow-up prior to 1980 as indication of absence of effective treatments. mortality following MI without effective treatment |Table 7. All-Cause Mortality Type of Infarct | 1-year Mortality | 5-year Mortality | 10-year Mortality | Annual Mortality | First | 10.3% | 28% | 45% | 5.3% | Subsequent | 21% | 52% | 75% | 12% |. Reference -. 1.5% risk of major cardiac event while waiting for cardiac catheterization. based on retrospective cohort study. 8,030 outpatients and inpatients referred for cardiac catheterization in Canada included. median waiting time 60 days for outpatients and 6 days for inpatients. 109 patients (1.4%) had major cardiac event while waiting, including. 0.6% mortality. 0.4% myocardial infarction. 0.5% heart failure. Reference - , correction can be found in CMAJ 2003 Jan 21;168(2):152, CMAJ 2003 Jun 10;168(12):1529, editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Risk scores
Vienna and Ludwigshafen Coronary Artery Disease risk score predicts 10-year mortality in patients with stable CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on prognostic cohort study with independent derivation and validation cohorts. derivation cohort included 547 patients (median age 64 years, 74% male) with stable CAD referred to Vienna General Hospital and followed for median 11.3 years. validation cohort included 1,275 similar patients (median age 65 years, 75% male) from Ludwigshafen Risk and Cardiovascular Health study followed for median 9.8 years. overall mortality was 39% in derivation cohort and 35% in validation cohort. Vienna and Ludwigshafen Coronary Artery Disease (VILCAD) risk score developed from 5 clinical factors significantly associated with increased 10-year mortality in derivation cohort (range 0-7 points). 2 points each for. age ≥ 75 years. left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) < 30%. 1 point each for. LVEF 30%-44%. HbA1c ≥ 6.5%. creatinine ≥ 1.3 mg/dL (115 mcmol/L). heart rate ≥ 75 beats per minute. 10-year mortality in derivation and validation cohorts by VILCAD risk score (estimated from figure) | Score | Derivation | Validation | 10-year Mortality | Number of Patients | 10-year Mortality | Number of Patients | 0 | 15% | 203 | 18% | 495 | 1 | 39% | 143 | 30% | 385 | 2 | 44% | 90 | 50% | 216 | 3 | 68% | 62 | 72% | 113 | 4 | 88% | 33 | 80% | 46 | ≥ 5 | 88% | 16 | 95% | 20 |. VILCAD risk score including cholinesterase had similar performance to score without cholinesterase. Reference -. simple clinical score predicts major adverse cardiac events in patients with normal ECG (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on validation cohort study. 2,255 patients with normal or mildly abnormal (nonspecific ST-T wave abnormalities) on resting ECG who were referred for exercise thallium testing for chest pain or dyspnea were assessed. exclusion criteria were Q waves on resting ECG, left ventricular hypertrophy, history of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) or CABG, non-CHD, bundle branch block or inability to exercise. 94% patients were followed up at mean 7 years. simple clinical score previously derived from factors significantly associated with cardiac death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, and revascularization (score range 0-10 with 1 point for each factor). male sex. history of MI (BUT Q wave on ECG was an exclusion criterion). typical angina. diabetes mellitus. insulin use. each decade > 40 years old. 5-year cardiac survival rates in validation cohort. for patients with normal ECG findings. 99.7% if score < 5. 97.7% if score of 5. 92.3% if score > 5. for patients with nonspecific ST-T wave abnormalities. 98.8% if score < 5. 95.9% if score of 5. 86.6% if score > 5. Reference -. Duke Sudden Cardiac Death risk score useful for predicting risk of sudden cardiac death among patients with CAD (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on independent derivation and validation cohorts. derivation cohort of 37,258 adults with ≥ 1 native coronary artery stenosis of ≥ 75%. sudden cardiac death in 4.2% at median 6.2-year follow-up. externally validated in 748 patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy from Sudden Cardiac Death Heart Failure (SCD-HeFT) Trial. calculation of Duke sudden cardiac death risk score. identify baseline left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). 56 points for 1%-5%. 51 points for 6%-10%. 46 points for 11%-15%. 42 points for 16%-20%. 37 points for 21%-25%. 32 points for 26%-30%. 28 points for 31%-35%. 23 points for 36%-40%. 19 points for 41%-45%. 14 points for 46%-50%. 9 points for 51%-55%. 5 points for 56%-60%. 0 points for > 61%. add additional points if the following are present. 2 diseased coronary arteries (6 points); 3 diseased coronary arteries (13 points). cerebrovascular disease (8 points). heart failure (7 points). diabetes (7 points). hypertension (6 points). tobacco use (4 points) |Table 8. Estimated Risk of Sudden Cardiac Death Duke SCD Risk Score | 1-year Risk | 5-year Risk | 10-year Risk | 0-10 | 0.2%-0.3% | 0.5%-0.9% | 1.2%-1.9% | 11-20 | 0.3%-0.4% | 1.1%-1.4% | 2.5%-3.2% | 21-30 | 0.6%-0.7% | 1.8%-2.3% | 4%-5.1% | 31-40 | 0.9%-1.2% | 3%-3.8% | 6.5%-8.3% | 41-50 | 1.5%-1.9% | 4.9%-6.2% | 10.5%-13.2% | 51-60 | 2.4%-3.1% | 7.9%-10% | 16.6%-20.8% | 61-70 | 4%-5% | 12.6%-15.8% | 25.8%-31.8% | 71-80 | 6.4%-8.2% | 19.8%-24.6% | 38.7%-46.6% | 81-90 | 10.3%-13% | 30.4%-37.1% | 55.3%-64.3% | 91-100 | 16.4%-20.5% | 44.8%-53.3% | 73.3%-81.6% | Abbreviation: SCD, sudden cardiac death. |. Reference -. PREDICT score may be superior to TIMI score in predicting death and recurrent MI. based on retrospective cohort study. 1,279 patients with myocardial infarction (MI) followed for mean 6.3 years. 562 ST-elevation myocardial infarctions (STEMIs) and 717 non-STEMIs (NSTEMIs) occurred. c-statistics comparing PREDICT vs. TIMI. in patients with NSTEMI. 1-month mortality 0.78 vs. 0.59 (p < 0.001). 1-year mortality 0.81 vs. 0.61 (p < 0.001). 1-month mortality or MI 0.73 vs. 0.59 (p < 0.001). 1-year mortality or MI 0.78 vs. 0.62 (p < 0.001). in patients with STEMI. 1-month mortality 0.81 vs. 0.73 (p < 0.001). 1-year mortality 0.78 vs. 0.73 (p = 0.017). 1-month mortality or MI 0.79 vs. 0.71 (p = 0.001). 1-year mortality or MI 0.77 vs. 0.71 (p = 0.005). Reference -. Duke graft index predicted all-cause mortality better than Duke CAD index or number of diseased vessels. based on cohort study. 3,178 patients with history of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) who had cardiac catheterization evaluated. Reference -. Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction Risk Score for Secondary Prevention (TIMI TRS 2P) helps predict risk of major cardiovascular events in patients taking vorapaxar for secondary prevention after myocardial infarction (level 1 [likely reliable] evidence). based on prognostic cohort study with independent derivation and validation cohorts. derivation cohort included 8,598 patients (median age 59 years, 80% men) with previous myocardial infarction (MI) randomized to placebo in TRA 2P-TIMI 50 trial. validation cohort included 8,223 similar patients randomized to vorapaxar in same trial. 8.4% derivation cohort and 6.2% in validation cohort had major cardiovascular events (composite of cardiovascular death, MI, and ischemic stroke) at median follow-up 30 months. TIMI TRS 2P risk score developed using factors significantly associated with major cardiovascular events in derivation cohort (total score 0-9 points) with 1 point for each of. age > 75 years. diabetes mellitus. hypertension. peripheral artery disease. previous stroke. previous coronary artery bypass grafting. history of heart failure. active smoking. estimated glomerular filtration rate < 60 ml/min/1.73 m using Modification of Diet in Renal Disease equation. TIMI TRS 2P risk scores categorized as low risk (score 0), intermediate risk (score 1-2), and high risk (score ≥ 3). major cardiovascular event rates by risk category in vorapaxar group. 3.5% in 1,599 patients with low risk. 6% in 4,989 patients with intermediate risk. 14.5% in 1,635 patients with high risk. TIMI TRS 2P had moderate discrimination (c-statistic 0.67). Reference -. additional validation study with 17,717 patients with ACS from IMPROVE-IT trial with consistent risk stratification but higher risk in all risk categories can be found in , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. impaired functional recovery, abnormal heart rate recovery, and higher SCORE each associated with increased risk of mortality in asymptomatic patients who had exercise stress testing. based on prospective cohort study. 3,554 asymptomatic adults aged 50-75 years who had exercise stress testing as part of executive health program were followed for mean 8 years. Systematic Coronary Risk Evaluation (SCORE) developed by European Society of Cardiology (2003) for use in primary prevention as estimation of 10-year risk of fatal cardiovascular disease in European nations. SCORE system variables include. age. sex. total cholesterol. systolic blood pressure. smoking status. coefficients representing high- and low-risk cohorts (defined by geographic location) incorporated into formula. independent predictors of death were. impaired functional capacity (relative risk [RR] 2.95, 95%CI 1.98-4.39). abnormal heart rate recovery (RR 1.59, 95%CI 1.04-2.41). higher SCORE result (RR 1.07, 95%CI 1.04-1.09 for 1% predicted increase in absolute risk). ST-segment depression did not predict mortality. SCORE superior to Framingham Risk Score in estimating global mortality risk. Reference - , commentary can be found in. investigational 9-protein risk score reported to predict 4-year cardiovascular outcomes in patients with stable coronary heart disease (, editorial can be found in ).
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Clinical history
anginal symptoms with or without ischemia associated with increased risk of cardiovascular mortality or nonfatal MI in outpatients with stable CAD. based on cohort study. 20,291 outpatients with stable CAD (prior myocardial infarction, chest pain, and evidence of myocardial ischemia, evidence of CAD on angiography, or prior revascularization) had noninvasive test for myocardial ischemia within 12 months of enrollment and were categorized into 1 of the following 4 groups. no angina or ischemia. evidence of myocardial ischemia without angina (silent ischemia). anginal symptoms. angina and ischemia. 469 cardiovascular-related deaths or myocardial infarctions reported over median follow-up of 24 months. compared with no angina or ischemia, increased risk of cardiovascular-related death or nonfatal MI for. angina alone (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.45, 95% CI 1.08-1.95). angina and ischemia (adjusted HR 1.75, 95% CI 1.34-2.29). Reference -. stable angina associated with increased risk of mortality and major adverse cardiovascular events in patients with nonobstructive coronary artery disease. based on retrospective cohort study. 11,223 patients with stable angina pectoris referred for coronary angiography were compared to 5,705 controls. no obstructive CAD in 65% of women vs. 32% of men (p < 0.001). compared to controls, stable angina associated with increased risk of. major adverse cardiovascular events. in patients with normal coronary arteries (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.52, 95% CI 1.27-1.83). in patients with diffuse nonobstructive CAD (adjusted HR 1.85, 95% CI 1.51-2.28). all-cause mortality. in patients with normal coronary arteries (adjusted HR 1.29, 95% CI 1.07-1.56). in patients with diffuse nonobstructive CAD (adjusted HR 1.52, 95% CI 1.24-1.88). Reference -. incidence of all-cause death or nonfatal myocardial infarction about 1 per 100 person-years in patients with stable angina and nonobstructive coronary artery disease. based on systematic review of observational studies. systematic review of 54 prospective or retrospective cohort studies assessing long-term clinical outcomes in 35,039 patients with symptomatic, stable angina and nonobstructive CAD. median follow-up 5 years. primary outcome was composite of all-cause death and nonfatal MI. incidence of all-cause death or nonfatal MI 0.98 per 100 person-years (95% CI 0.77-1.19 per 100 person-years) in analysis of 49 studies with 29,335 patients, results limited by significant heterogeneity. patients with less-than-obstructive CAD (< 50% coronary stenosis) had significantly higher incidence of all-cause death or nonfatal MI (1.32, 95% CI 1.02-1.62 per 100 person-years) compared to patients with entirely normal coronary arteries (0.52, 95% CI 0.34-0.71 per 100 person-years). factors associated with increased risk of death or nonfatal MI included dyslipidemia, diabetes, and hypertension. Reference -. mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia associated with increased risk of cardiac events or all-cause death in patients with stable CAD. based on systematic review of observational studies. systematic review of 5 prospective cohort studies evaluating effect of mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia on adverse outcomes in 555 adults (85% male) with stable CAD. duration of follow-up ranged from 35 days to 8.8 years. mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia associated with increased risk of cardiac events or all-cause death in analysis of all studies. relative risk 2.24 (95% CI 1.59-3.15). NNH 3-12 with cardiac events or all-cause death in 13.5% of patients without mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia. Reference -. peripheral arterial disease associated with increased cardiac mortality in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2. based on prospective cohort study. 1,294 patients with type 2 diabetes in Western Australia included in Fremantle Diabetes Study. 146 patients (12.3%) had peripheral artery disease (PAD) at baseline, defined as ankle brachial index (ABI) ≤ 0.9. cardiac mortality 51% in patients with PAD vs. 26% in patients without (p < 0.0001). Reference -. previous history of stroke or transient ischemic attack associated with increased risk of cardiovascular events and nonfatal hemorrhagic stroke in patients with CAD. based on retrospective cohort study. 26,389 patients with CAD from REduction of Atherothrombosis for Continued Health (REACH) registry were evaluated for risk of cardiovascular events. 16.9% had history of stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA). duration of follow-up was 4 years. compared to no history of stroke or TIA, history of stroke or TIA associated with increased risk of. cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.52, 95% CI 1.4-1.65). nonfatal ischemic stroke (adjusted HR 3.06, 95% CI 2.62-3.57). nonfatal hemorrhagic stroke (adjusted HR 1.76, 95% CI 1-3.08). patients ≤ 1 year after stroke/TIA had increased risk of nonfatal hemorrhagic stroke (HR 2.64, 95% CI 1.04-6.69) compared to patients > 1 year after stroke/TIA. in patients treated with dual antiplatelet therapy, previous stroke/TIA associated with increased risk of nonfatal hemorrhagic stroke (adjusted HR 5.21, 95% CI 1.24-21.9). Reference -. history of vascular event and underlying vascular disease associated with increased risk of cardiovascular mortality, MI, or stroke. based on cohort study. 45,227 outpatients ≥ 45 years old with vascular disease (coronary artery disease [CAD], cerebrovascular disease, or peripheral artery disease [PAD]) or with multiple risk factors for vascular disease were followed up to 4 years. ischemic events defined as composite of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction (MI), and stroke. 12% of patients had ischemic events. mortality 5.1%. MI in 2.7%. stroke in 4.2%. ischemic events in. 9.1% of patients without vascular disease but with risk factors only. 12.2% of patients with vascular disease. 18.3% of patients with vascular disease and prior history of ischemic events. Reference -. increased number of affected vessels at baseline associated with increased risk of mortality and myocardial infarction in patients with stable coronary disease. based on post hoc analysis of COURAGE trial. 2,275 patients with outcome of death, myocardial infarction, or hospitalization for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome were analyzed. increased number of affected vessels at baseline (major coronary arteries with ≥ 50% diameter stenosis) associated with increased risk of. mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 1.5, 95% CI 1.2-1.8). myocardial infarction (HR 1.5, 95% CI 1.3-1.8). hospitalization for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome (HR 1.2, 95% CI 1.1-1.4). use of percutaneous coronary intervention or presence of proximal left anterior descending stenosis not associated with any outcome analyzed. Reference -. left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 50% at baseline associated with increased risk of mortality in patients with stable coronary disease. based on post-hoc analysis of COURAGE trial. 2,275 patients with outcome of death, myocardial infarction, or hospitalization for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome were analyzed. left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 50% at baseline. associated with increased risk of mortality (hazard ratio 1.9, 95% CI 1.3-2.6). not associated with risk of myocardial infarction or hospitalization for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome. use of percutaneous coronary intervention or presence of proximal left anterior descending stenosis not associated with any outcome analyzed. Reference -. increasing number of risk factors present associated with increased risk of stroke in 6 months following MI. based on cohort study. 111,023 Medicare patients who had a myocardial infarction (MI) included. 2.5% of patients had stroke over within 6 months of MI. factors associated with increased risk of stroke following MI included. prior stroke (risk ratio [RR] 1.75, 95% CI 1.59-1.92). atrial fibrillation (RR 1.52, 95% CI 1.39-1.67). peripheral vascular disease (RR 1.31, 95% CI 1.18-1.47). age > 75 years (RR 1.29, 95% CI 1.18-1.4). any frailty (RR 1.27, 95% CI 1.16-1.38). diabetes (RR 1.26, 95% CI 1.16-1.37). black race (RR 1.22, 95% CI 1.16-1.53). hypertension (RR 1.13, 95% CI 1.04-1.23). rate of stroke among patients with risk factors. 0.93% for 0 factors. 1.43% for 1 factor. 2.08% for 2 factors. 2.72% for 3 factors. 3.58% for 4 factors. 4.17% for ≥ 5 factors. Reference -. low fitness and smoking each associated with increased risk of mortality in men and women with cardiovascular disease. based on cohort study. 32,421 men and women with cardiovascular disease had medical examination including maximal exercise test. 2.3% mortality during 211,996 patient-years of follow-up in men. 1.3% mortality during 52,982 patient-years of follow-up in women. factors independently associated with increased mortality. in men. smoking (adjusted relative risk [RR] 1.65, 95% CI 1.39-1.97). abnormal electrocardiogram (adjusted RR 1.64, 95% CI 1.34-2.01). chronic illness (adjusted RR 1.63, 95% CI 1.37-1.95). low fitness (adjusted RR 1.52, 95% CI 1.28-1.82). elevated systolic blood pressure (adjusted RR 1.34, 95% CI 1.36-3.21). increased cholesterol (adjusted RR 1.34, 95% CI 1.13-1.59). in women. low fitness (adjusted RR 2.1, 95% CI 1.36-3.21). smoking (adjusted RR 1.99, 95% CI 1.25-3.17). Reference -. overweight and obesity NOT associated with increased mortality in patients with CAD. based on systematic review. systematic review of 40 cohort studies in 250,152 patients with CAD followed for at least 6 months (mean 3.8 years). patients with low body mass index (BMI < 20) had increased total mortality (relative risk 1.37) and cardiovascular mortality (relative risk 1.45). overweight patients (BMI 25-29.9) had lower risk of total mortality (relative risk 0.87) and cardiovascular mortality (relative risk 0.88). obesity (BMI 30-35) not associated with significant risk for mortality or cardiovascular mortality. severe obesity (BMI 35 or higher) not associated with significant risk for total mortality but associated with highest risk for cardiovascular mortality (relative risk 1.88). Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Cardiac stress testing
cardiac stress testing and prognosis. normal exercise imaging suggests cardiac events unlikely for 3 years. specific test findings associated with increased mortality or cardiac events include. treadmill exercise score (Duke treadmill score). exercise-induced ischemia (ST-segment depression ≥ 1 mm). premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) during recovery. chronotropic incompetence (low heart rate increase during exercise). abnormal heart rate recovery. exercise capacity < 85% predicted by age (in women) (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). prognostic value of exercise testing in asymptomatic women may be found in fitness-related variables (exercise capacity, heart rate recovery, achieving target heart rate) instead of ECG ischemic criteria. see Cardiac stress testing for details.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Cardiac troponins
elevated cardiac troponins associated with increased risk for adverse cardiovascular outcomes. elevated troponin or creatine kinase-myocardial band (CK-MB) associated with increased 1-year mortality after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). based on cohort study without standardized laboratory testing. 4,930 patients who had elective PCI had troponin I or T and CK-MB fraction measured within 6-24 hours of procedure. data pooled from multiple medical centers using different assays for troponin and CK-MB. myocardial infarction defined as troponin or CK-MB levels > 3 times upper limit of normal. myocardial infarction in. 24.3% by troponin criteria. 7.2% by CK-MB criteria. 1-year mortality. 4.4% in patients with myocardial infarction by troponin criteria. 5.8% in patients with myocardial infarction by CK-MB criteria. 2.1% in patients without myocardial infarction. elevated troponin or CK-MB associated with increased 1-year mortality. adjusted hazard ratio 1.7 (95% CI 1.1-2.5) for troponin. adjusted hazard ratio 2.5 (95% CI 1.5-4.1) for CK-MB. Reference - , editorial can be found in. increasing high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay associated with elevated risk of cardiovascular death and heart failure, but not myocardial infarction, in patients with stable coronary artery disease. based on 2 cohort studies. 3,679 patients with stable coronary artery disease and preserved left ventricular function from PEACE trial had cardiac troponin T levels measured with high-sensitivity assay. patients followed for cardiovascular events for median 5.2 years. cardiac troponin T levels. at or above limit of detection (0.001 mcg/L) in 97.7%. at or above 99th percentile for apparently healthy subjects (0.0133 mcg/L) in 11.1%. increasing cardiac troponin T levels associated with increased risk of. cardiovascular death (adjusted hazard ratio per unit increase in natural logarithm of troponin T level 2.09, 95% CI 1.6-2.74). heart failure (adjusted hazard ratio 2.2, 95% CI 1.66-2.9). increasing cardiac troponin T levels not associated with risk of myocardial infarction. Reference - , commentary can be found in. 984 outpatients with stable coronary artery disease had measure of serum high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level and performed exercise treadmill testing with stress echocardiography. 80.7% had detectable high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level at baseline. 32.2% had cardiovascular event during 8.2 years median follow-up. each doubling of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level associated with increased risk of. any cardiovascular event (cardiovascular death, heart failure, or myocardial infarction) (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.37, 95% CI 1.14-1.65). cardiovascular death (adjusted HR 1.36, 95% CI 1.03-1.81). heart failure (adjusted HR 1.44, 95% CI 1.1-1.89). Reference - , editorial can be found in. elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I associated with increased risk for cardiovascular death, heart failure, and nonfatal myocardial infarction in patients with stable coronary artery disease. based on prospective cohort study. 3,623 patients with stable coronary artery disease and preserved left ventricular function from PEACE trial had cardiac troponin I levels measured with high-sensitivity assay and were followed for median 5.2 years. 98.5% had cardiac troponin I levels greater than detection level (1.2 pg/mL [0.0012 mcg/L]). 203 patients died of cardiovascular causes or were hospitalized for heart failure, and 209 patients had nonfatal myocardial infarctions during follow-up. comparing highest quartile with lower 3 quartiles, increased levels of high-sensitive cardiac troponin I associated with increased risk for. cardiovascular death or heart failure (hazard ratio 1.88, 95% CI 1.33-2.66). nonfatal myocardial infarction (hazard ratio 1.44, 95% CI 1.03-2.01). Reference - , correction can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol 2014 Jan 21;63(2):195. see Cardiac troponin testing for additional information.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|C-reactive protein
CRP levels have uncertain prognostic value in patients with stable coronary artery disease. based on systematic review with substantial heterogeneity and possible publication bias. systematic review of 83 prospective studies of 61,684 patients with stable coronary artery disease evaluating prognosis of CRP levels for death and nonfatal cardiovascular events. heterogeneity indicated by I= 79.5 and publication bias by funnel plot analysis (Egger's test p < 0.001). adjusting for publication bias the relative risk for the top third of CRP levels compared to bottom third was 1.9 (95% CI 1.13-1.25). Reference -. see C-reactive protein (CRP) as cardiac risk factor for details.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or NT-pro-BNP
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or NT-pro-BNP after acute coronary syndrome (ACS) predicts subsequent risk of death, new heart failure, and coronary events (see Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) testing for details). elevated NT-proBNP levels associated with increased mortality and risk of cardiovascular events in patients with stable CAD. based on prospective cohort study. 987 patients with stable CAD followed mean 3.7 years. cardiovascular events assessed were MI, stroke and heart failure. increasing increments of NT-proBNP quartiles significantly associated with increased risk of mortality and cardiovascular events. Reference - , editorial can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Other biomarkers
higher triglyceride levels associated with increased long-term all-cause mortality compared to low to normal triglycerides (< 100 mg/dL) in adults with coronary artery disease. based on cohort study. 15,355 adults aged 45-74 years (81% male) with coronary artery disease, history of previous myocardial infarction, and stable, symptomatic angina pectoris for 2 years who were screened for or included in the Bezafibrate Infarction Prevention trial were evaluated. median follow-up 22.8 years. compared to low/normal triglyceride level (< 100 mg/dL), higher triglycerides associated with increased all-cause mortality. adjusted HR 1.68 (95% CI 1.38-2.06) for severe hypertriglyceridemia, > 500 mg/dL. adjusted HR 1.29 (95% CI 1.22-1.37) for moderate hypertriglyceridemia, 200-499 mg/dL. adjusted HR 1.16 (95% CI 1.09-1.23) for borderline hypertriglyceridemia, 150-199 mg/dL. adjusted hazard ratio (HR) 1.06 (95% CI 1.01-1.12) for high/normal, 100-149 mg/dL. consistent results in subgroup analysis excluding patients who developed incidental cancer during 22-year follow-up (25.4% of cohort). Reference -. high triglyceride-rich lipoprotein cholesterol associated with increased 5-year risk of major adverse cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery disease on atorvastatin 10 mg/day. based on cohort analysis of data from TNT trial. 9,993 adults (mean age 61 years) with coronary artery disease and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol < 130 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) who were randomized to atorvastatin 80 mg/day vs. 10 mg/day and had baseline data available for triglyceride-rich lipoprotein (TRL) cholesterol were followed for median 4.9 years. 21% had TRL cholesterol ≤ 19 mg/mL. 19% had TRL cholesterol 19.1-24 mg/mL. 20% had TRL cholesterol 24.1-30 mg/mL. 20% had TRL cholesterol 30.1-39.5 mg/mL. 20% had TRL cholesterol > 39.5 mg/mL. TRL cholesterol calculated as total cholesterol minus high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol minus LDL cholesterol. major adverse cardiovascular events defined as composite of coronary artery disease-related death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and stroke. compared to TRL cholesterol ≤ 19 mg/mL in patients on atorvastatin 10 mg/day, increased 5-year risk of major adverse cardiovascular events associated with. TRL cholesterol > 39.5 mg/mL (hazard ratio 1.48, 95% CI 1.15-1.92). TRL cholesterol 30.1-39.5 mg/mL (hazard ratio 1.27, 95% CI 0.97-1.67). no significant difference in 5-year risk of major adverse cardiovascular events comparing TRL cholesterol 19.1-30 mg/mL vs. TRL cholesterol ≤ 19 mg/mL in patients on atorvastatin 10 mg/day. Reference -. see Statins for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease for effect of atorvastatin 80 mg/day on 5-year risk of major adverse cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery disease and elevated baseline triglyceride-rich lipoprotein cholesterol. impaired fasting glucose defined as 6.1-6.9 mmol/L (110-125 mg/dL) associated with increased risk of CHD event in postmenopausal women. based on cohort study. 2,763 postmenopausal women with established CHD followed for mean 6.8 years. impaired fasting glucose defined as 6.1-6.9 mmol/L (110-125 mg/dL) associated with increased risk of CHD event (hazard ratio 1.37, 95% CI 1.08-1.74). Reference -. low T3 levels associated with increased mortality in cardiac patients. based on prospective cohort study. 573 consecutive cardiac patients followed for 1 year. 1-year mortality 14.4% in 173 patients with free T3 < 3.1 pmol/L vs. 3% in 400 patients with free T3 ≥ 3.1 pmol/L (p < 0.0001). Reference -. higher levels of fibroblast growth factor 23 and lower levels of uncarboxylated matrix Gla protein each associated with cardiovascular events and mortality in patients with stable coronary artery disease (CAD). based on cohort study. 833 patients with stable CAD were followed for median follow-up 6 years. compared to fibroblast growth factor 23 levels < 33.5 RU/mL, levels > 56.7 RU/mL associated with increased. mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 2.15, 95% CI 1.43-3.24). cardiovascular events (HR 1.83, 95% CI 1.15-2.91). Reference - , editorial can be found in. low level of glutathione peroxidase 1 activity associated with increased risk of cardiovascular events in patients with stable or unstable angina. based on cohort study. 636 patients with symptoms of stable or unstable angina had baseline testing of erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase 1 and superoxide dismutase activity and were followed median 4.7 years. 83 patients had cardiovascular event (64 deaths and 19 nonfatal MIs). cardiovascular risk inversely associated with glutathione peroxidase 1 activity, even after adjusting for other risk factors. no association between superoxide dismutase activity and cardiovascular risk. Reference -. higher levels of circulating CD34+KDR+ endothelial progenitor cells associated with decreased cardiovascular mortality. based on cohort study. 519 patients with angiography-confirmed CAD had flow cytometry testing to determine level of endothelial progenitor cells and were followed for 1 year. level of endothelial progenitor cells was. low (log numbers 1.71 or less) in 168 patients. medium (log numbers 1.72-1.96) in 172 patients. high (log numbers 1.97-3.02) in 167 patients. increasing levels of endothelial progenitor cells associated with reduced cardiovascular mortality (hazard ratio 0.31, 95% CI 0.16-0.63). Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. adiponectin levels not independently associated with risk of cardiovascular events. based on prospective cohort study. 1,051 patients aged 30-70 years with incident CHD followed for median 56.6 months. total- and high-molecular weight adiponectin levels not associated with increased risk of cardiovascular events in adjusted analysis. Reference -. blood test that may not be associated with poorer prognosis. elevated total cholesterol levels NOT associated with increased long-term mortality in elderly patients after MI. based on retrospective cohort study. 7,166 patients > 65 years old discharged alive with diagnosis of AMI included. 4,923 patients (69%) had total cholesterol levels evaluated. comparing patients with total cholesterol > 240 mg/dL (6.2 mmol/L) vs. < 240 mg/dL (6.2 mmol/L). 1-year mortality 17.2% vs. 17.4% (not significant). 6-year mortality 47.9% vs. 48.7% (not significant). comparing total cholesterol > 160 mg/dL (4 mmol/L) vs. < 160 mg/dL (4 mmol/L). 1-year mortality 22.2% vs. 16.5% (not significant). 6-year mortality was 55.5% vs. 47.3% (not significant). Reference -. triglyceride levels may not be useful therapeutically or prognostically for preventing or predicting MIs. based on post hoc secondary analysis of 3 large prospective cohort studies. triglyceride measurements did not improve discrimination between subjects who did and did not suffer myocardial infarctions (MIs). triglyceride levels associated with increased risk of MI in subgroup of women with high-risk cholesterol profiles (in 1 study). Reference - , editorial can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Renal impairment and proteinuria
elevated serum creatinine may predict subsequent coronary events in patients with CHD. based on prospective cohort study. 1,051 patients aged 30-70 years with CHD followed for mean 48.7 months. 9% of patients had subsequent coronary events. patients were recruited during in-hospital rehabilitation program within 3 months of diagnosis of CHD, usually within weeks following ACS. creatinine clearance estimated using Cockcroft-Gault formula. compared to creatinine clearance > 90 mL/minute, creatinine clearance < 60 mL/minute associated with higher risk for coronary events (hazard ratio 2.39, 95% CI 1.06-5.4). Reference - , editorial can be found in , correction can be found in Arch Intern Med 2006 Feb 26;167(4):353. proteinuria with or without kidney dysfunction associated with higher risk of death and cardiovascular outcomes after MI. based on post hoc secondary analysis of randomized trial. 4,908 patients with previous myocardial infarction (MI) participating in randomized trial with median follow-up 58.9 months. assessments at baseline included. proteinuria, defined as ≥ 1+ on dipstick. kidney dysfunction, defined as glomerular filtration rate (GMR) < 60 mL/minute/1.73m. kidney status was. dysfunctional in 707 patients without proteinuria and 173 patients with proteinuria. functional in 2,839 patients without proteinuria and 379 patients with proteinuria. compared to patients with no proteinuria and normal kidney function. increased risk of all-cause mortality in patients with proteinuria and. kidney dysfunction (hazard ratio [HR] 3.31, 95% CI 2.39-4.59). normal kidney function (HR 1.61, 95% CI 1.17-2.2). increased risk of coronary death or nonfatal myocardial infarction in patients with proteinuria and. kidney dysfunction (HR 2.31, 95% CI 1.63-3.26). normal kidney function (HR 1.47, 95% CI 1.11-1.95). Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. decreasing estimated GFR associated with increasing mortality and risk of cardiovascular events in post-MI patients. based on cohort analysis of data from VALIANT trial. 14,527 patients with acute myocardial infarction and heart failure or left ventricular systolic dysfunction from VALIANT trial included. each reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate (GMR) of 10 units associated with increased risk of death and nonfatal cardiovascular outcomes (hazard ratio for death 1.1, 95% CI 1.08-1.12). Reference - , editorial can be found in , correction can be found in N Engl J Med 2010 Sep 16;363(12):1190, commentary can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Electrocardiographic (ECG) findings
early repolarization on ECG in healthy middle-aged persons may be associated with increased risk of cardiac-related death. based on cohort study in Finland. 10,864 middle-aged persons (mean age 44 years) from general population had 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG). early repolarization defined as elevation of QRS-ST junction ≥ 0.1 millivolt (mV) in leads other than V1-V3. early repolarization in 5.8%. 3.5% in inferior leads. 2.4% in lateral leads. 0.1% in both leads. elevation ≥ 0.1 mV in inferior leads associated with increased risk of cardiac-related death (adjusted relative risk 1.28 [95% CI 1.04-1.59], p = 0.03). elevation > 0.2 mV in inferior leads associated with increased risk of death from. cardiac cause (adjusted relative risk 2.98 [95% CI 1.85-4.92]. p < 0.001). from arrhythmia (adjusted relative risk 2.92 [95% CI 1.45-5.89], p = 0.01). additional factors associated with significant increased risk of cardiac-related death were prolonged QT interval corrected for heart rate and left ventricular hypertrophy. Reference - , commentary can be found in. left anterior hemiblock on baseline ECG associated with increased cardiac mortality in patients with suspected CAD. based on cohort study. 1,187 patients with suspected CAD and no history of myocardial infarction had dobutamine stress echocardiography and mean follow-up 5 years. 125 patients (11%) died from cardiac causes. 159 patients (13%) had left anterior hemiblock on baseline electrocardiography (ECG). annual cardiac mortality 4.9% in patients with left anterior hemiblock vs. 1.9% in patients without (p < 0.0001). Reference -. unrecognized MI may have similar prognosis as recognized MI. based on cohort study. 5,888 patients > 65 years old included. unrecognized myocardial infarction (MI) defined as ECG evidence of prior MI without history of infarction. 901 patients (15.3%) had evidence of prior MI of whom 201 (3.4% of cohort) were previously unrecognized. 6-year mortality was. 21.4% for unrecognized MI (not significant vs. recognized MI). 25.4% for recognized MI. 12% for patients with no MI (p < 0.01 vs. unrecognized MI). Reference -. T wave abnormalities, ST segment depression, and ECG indicating ischemia each associated with higher mortality in men aged 50-70 years, especially if persistent. based on prospective cohort study with high dropout rate. 2,322 men aged 50 years in 1970-1973 were followed for 32 years. 1,139 men who had ECG at mean age 50 years and at mean age 71 years were analyzed. normal ECG in 55.6% at age 71 years. 341 ECGs (30%) not meeting criteria for normal ECG excluded from analysis. cardiovascular mortality per 1,000 person-years from age 70 years. for normal ECG 7.6 (adjusted risk ratio [RR] 0.36, 95% CI 0.25-0.55). for new-onset T wave abnormality 25.3 (adjusted RR 2.68, 95% CI 1.81-3.92). for new-onset ST segment depression 26.6 (adjusted RR 2.56, 95% CI 1.76-3.75). for new-onset ECG indicating ischemia 21.9 (adjusted RR 2.9, 95% CI 2.04-4.14). for persistent T wave abnormality 46.5 (adjusted RR 5.3, 95% CI 2.56-11). for persistent ST segment depression 62.5 (adjusted RR 5.8, 95% CI 1.83-18.3). for persistent ECG indicating ischemia 45.6 (adjusted RR 6.21, 95% CI 3.51-11). all-cause mortality per 1,000 person-years from age 70 years. for new-onset ST segment depression 39.6 (adjusted RR 1.52, 95% CI 1.14-2.03). for new-onset ECG indicating ischemia 35.5 (adjusted RR 1.47, 95% CI 1.16-1.87). for persistent T wave abnormality 58.1 (adjusted RR 2.3, 95% CI 1.22-4.33). for persistent ECG indicating ischemia 57.8 (adjusted RR 2.43, 95% CI 1.51-3.9). reverted ECG changes (present at age 50 but absent at age 70 years) tended to be associated with increased risk but not statistically significant. Reference -. persistent nonspecific minor ECG ST-T abnormalities associated with increased risk of cardiovascular and overall mortality in 29-year follow-up of 1,673 men aged 40-55 years ( ), editorial can be found in. absence of heart rate turbulence after ventricular premature beats associated with increased risk of mortality in cohort study of 1,291 patients with CAD (). European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guideline on use of heart rate variability for prognostication can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Imaging
negative result on positron emission tomography myocardial perfusion imaging associated with low risk of cardiac death in patients with known or suspected CAD. based on systematic review of observational studies. systematic review of 11 studies evaluating use of positron emission tomography (PET) myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) for predicting mortality in 20,471 patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease. mean follow-up 36.9 months for cardiac death, 26.8 months for all-cause death, and 35.7 months for major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE). annualized event rate after negative test (ERNT) with PET MPI. 0.39% for cardiac death (reported to be similar to rate in age-matched population without cardiovascular risk). 2.29% for all-cause death. 3.27% for MACE. Reference -. cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging findings may predict future cardiovascular events in patients with recent myocardial infarction or suspected or known CAD. based on systematic review. systematic review of 56 studies evaluating cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for prediction of future cardiac events in 25,497 patients with recent myocardial infarction or suspected or known coronary artery disease. in patients with recent myocardial infarction, left ventricular ejection fraction was independently associated with major adverse cardiovascular events (range of adjusted hazard ratios [HRs] 1.03-1.05 per 1% decrease). in patients with suspected or known coronary artery disease, hard events (all-cause mortality, cardiac death, cardiac transplantation, and myocardial infarction) independently associated with. wall motion abnormalities (HRs 1.87-2.99). inducible perfusion defects (HRs 3.02-7.77). left ventricular ejection fraction (HRs 0.72-0.82 per 10% increase). infarction (HRs 1.76-3.21). Reference -. abnormal T1 mapping of remote noninfarcted myocardium by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging may help predict mortality and major adverse cardiocerebrovascular events in patients with known or suspected CAD. based on prospective cohort study. 665 adults (median age 57 years) with known or suspected CAD having routine cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with T1 mapping and late gadolinium enhancement were followed for median 17 months. T1 mapping measurements for evaluating presence and severity of myocardial changes and pathological myocardial remodeling were obtained in remote myocardium of midventricular septum. 42% had abnormal T1 and 29% had late gadolinium enhancement. overall, 5.1% died and 10.7% had major adverse cardiocerebrovascular events (composite of cardiac mortality, nonfatal acute coronary syndrome, stroke, and documented appropriate shock from device). abnormal T1 associated with increased likelihood of. all-cause mortality (adjusted hazard ratio 1.1 per 10-millisecond change, 95% CI 1.04-1.14). major adverse cardiocerebrovascular events (adjusted hazard ratio 1.06 per 10-millisecond change, 95% CI 1.03-1.1). consistent results for late gadolinium enhancement. Reference - , editorial can be found in.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Coronary blood flow
impaired coronary flow reserve associated with increased risk of cardiovascular death in patients with stable coronary symptoms. based on cohort study. 4,029 patients (median age 66 years) with stable coronary symptoms who had myocardial perfusion positron emission tomography scans were assessed. coronary flow reserve (CFR) defined as ratio of maximal myocardial blood flow (MBF) during pharmacologically-induced coronary vasodilation to resting MBF. decreasing CFR associated with increased risk of cardiovascular death (adjusted hazard ratio 1.79 per 1-unit decrease, 95% CI 1.38-2.31). Reference -. reduced coronary flow reserve and increased CAD prognostic index each associated with increased risk of cardiovascular death or heart failure in patients with known or suspected CAD. based on prospective cohort study. 329 patients with known or suspected CAD referred for invasive coronary angiography within 90 days after myocardial perfusion positron emission tomography (PET) were assessed. severity of angiographic disease assessed using CAD prognostic index score (range 0-100, with higher score indicating worse stenosis). coronary flow reserve (CFR) calculated as ratio of stress to rest absolute myocardial blood flow for whole left ventricle by PET. mean CAD prognostic index score 32, 49.5% had CFR < 1.6. 19.5% had composite of cardiovascular death or heart failure admission during median 3.1-year follow-up. increased risk of cardiovascular death or heart failure associated with. reduced CFR (adjusted hazard ratio 2.02 per 1-unit decrease, 95% CI 1.2-3.4). increased CAD prognostic index (adjusted hazard ratio per 10-unit increase 1.17, 95% CI 1.01-1.34). CFR had modest but significant inverse correlation with CAD prognostic index (correlation coefficient -0.27, p < 0.0001). Reference - , editorial can be found in. low coronary pressure-derived collateral flow index associated with decreased 15-year survival in patients with chronic stable coronary artery disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on prospective cohort study without independent validation. 1,181 patients with chronic stable coronary artery disease were assessed for coronary pressure-derived collateral flow index (CFI) and followed for up to 16 years (mean 7.3 years). CFI defined as (mean distal coronary occlusive pressure - central venous pressure) divided by (mean aortic pressure - central venous pressure). pressure measurements obtained during 1-minute coronary balloon occlusion following diagnostic coronary angiography. in patients with CFI measurement > 1, lowest single CFI measurement used for survival analysis. cumulative 15-year survival was 48% in patients with CFI < 0.25 vs. 65% in patients with CFI ≥ 0.25 (p = 0.006). Reference -.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Psychosocial factors and prognosis
considerations in elderly patients. atypical symptoms, nonwhite race, and heart failure associated with delay in presenting to hospital in elderly patients with acute myocardial infarction. based on prospective cohort study. 2,500 adults aged ≥ 75 years (10.7% nonwhite race) hospitalized for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) were assessed for predictors of delay in presenting to hospital. 21.4% had atypical symptoms (any combination of symptoms that did not include chest pain). 26.4% had ST elevation myocardial infarction. 73.6% had non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. 42% had prehospital delay, defined as symptom duration ≥ 6 hours before going to hospital. prehospital delay associated with. nonwhite race (adjusted odds ratio [OR] 1.54, 95% CI 1.17-2.01). atypical symptoms (adjusted OR 1.41, 95% CI 1.15-1.72). heart failure (adjusted OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.09-1.68). sex, diabetes mellitus, income, prior AMI, education, and social support not associated with prehospital delay. Reference - SILVER-AMI study (). . patients > 75 years old had more severe coronary disease, women and patients of black race had less severe disease among hospital admissions for unstable angina or NSTEMI. based on inception cohort study. 3,318 patients selected from 8,676 patients in the TIMI III registry. all patients had acute ischemic chest pain without persistent ST-segment elevation and no Q-wave myocardial infarction. coronary disease was. less severe and treatment less intensive in women, but outcomes similar to men. less severe in black patients who had lower rate of revascularization, less recurrent ischemia and lower 6-week mortality. more severe in elderly patients, more likely to be treated medically and had far more adverse outcomes. Reference -. frailty associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality in elderly patients with severe cardiovascular disease. based on systematic review. systematic review of 9 studies evaluating frailty via any systematically defined criteria in 54,250 elderly patients with cardiovascular disease. mean follow-up 6.2 years. prevalence of frailty 50%-54% among patients with severe cardiovascular disease. frailty associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality (odds ratio 1.6-4). Reference -. recovery of function after acute myocardial infarction AMI did not occur in prospective cohort study of 89 older patients (). depression and anxiety. depression associated with increased mortality in patients with coronary heart disease. based on systematic review. systematic review of 20 prospective cohort studies evaluating impact of depressive symptoms or disorders on cardiac or all-cause mortality in patients with coronary heart disease. depression associated with increased 2-year mortality (odds ratio 2.24, 95% CI 1.37-3.6). Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. similar results in systematic review of 16 cohorts with 6,367 patients followed for mean 13.7 months after MI (), editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. depression and anxiety associated with increased risk of major adverse cardiac events in patients with stable CAD. based on cohort study. 804 patients with stable CAD were followed for 2 years. major adverse cardiac events defined as cardiac death, MI, cardiac arrest, or nonelective revascularization. at baseline. 57 patients (7.1%) major depressive disorder. 43 patients (5.3%) had generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). 11 patients (1.4%) had comorbidity. 220 patients (27.4%) had elevated depression symptoms. 333 patients (41.4%) had elevated anxiety symptoms. 21.1% of patients had both elevated depression and anxiety symptoms. risk factors for major adverse cardiac events. major depressive disorder (odds ratio [OR] 2.85, 95% CI 1.62-5.01). GAD (OR 2.09, 95% CI 1.08-4.05). elevated depression symptoms (OR 1.75, 95% CI 1.21-2.54) (but not significant after adjustment). elevated anxiety symptoms (OR 1.67, 95% CI 1.18-2.37). comorbidity not associated with higher risk than depression or anxiety alone. Reference -. depression and anxiety significantly associated with decreased self-reported functional status at 1 year after catheterization. based on cohort study. 198 patients with CAD had cardiac catheterization. depression and anxiety significantly associated with decreased self-reported functional status at 1 year after catheterization. Reference -. depression after CABG associated with higher risk for cardiac events within 1 year. based on cohort study. 309 patients who had CABG followed for 1 year. 63 patients (20%) had major depression. cardiac events occurred at 1 year in 27% of patients with depression and 10% of patients without depression (p < 0.0008). Reference - , commentary can be found in. review of depression and cardiovascular disease can be found in. antidepressant use associated with lower mortality and lower risk of recurrent myocardial infarction (MI) in patients with depression and MI (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on cohort analysis of ENRICHD trial. 1,834 patients with depression who had acute myocardial infarction (MI) from randomized trial of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) included. 457 fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events occurred. 446 patients (24.3%) of patients received antidepressants. compared to nonuse, use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors associated with decreased. mortality or recurrent MI (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 0.57, 95% CI 0.38-0.84). all-cause mortality (adjusted HR 0.59, 95% CI 0.37-0.96). recurrent MI (adjusted HR 0.53, 95% CI 0.32-0.9). Reference - , commentary can be found in. social support. low functional social support associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality in patients with CAD. based on systematic review limited by statistical heterogeneity. systematic review of 25 cohort studies evaluating effects of low social support on development or course of CAD. follow-up ranged from 6 months to 14.5 years. low functional social support associated with increase in. all-cause mortality in patients with CAD (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.59, 95% CI 1.21-2.08) in analysis of 6 studies, result limited by significant heterogeneity. composite of cardiac mortality and all-cause mortality in patients with CAD (risk ratio [RR] 1.71, 95% CI 1.26-2.31) in analysis of 9 studies, result limited by significant heterogeneity. increased risk of MI in patients without preexisting CAD. for all patients in 1 study (HR 1.53, 95% CI 1.02-2.28). in women but not men in 1 study (HR for women 2.23, 95% CI 1.17-4.25). Reference -. limited social support associated with increased mortality after MI. based on systematic review. systematic review of 5 prospective cohort studies with 3,433 patients followed for defined period (range 6 months to 9 years). 4 of 5 studies found significant association between lack of social support and mortality with relative risk ranging from 1.5 to 2.9. Reference -. living alone associated with increased risk of mortality in patients ≤ 80 years old at risk of or with atherothrombosis. based on cohort study. 44,573 stable patients at risk of (17.8%) or with atherothrombosis (82.2%) ≥ 45 years old followed for 4 years. 19.3% living alone. vascular disease without an ischemic event in 21%. coronary artery disease in 18%, cerebrovascular disease in 18%, peripheral artery disease in 21%. comparing living alone vs. living with others. overall mortality 14.1% vs 11.1% (p < 0.01). cardiovascular mortality 8.6% vs 6.8% (p < 0.01). mortality (age 45-65 years) 7.7% vs 5.7% (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 1.24, 95% CI 1.01-1.51). mortality (age 66-80 years) 13.2% vs 12.3% (adjusted HR 1.12, 95% CI 1.01-1.26). no significant difference in mortality for patients age > 80 years. Reference - , commentary can be found in. emotional stress and personality. acute and chronic mental stress can be harmful in patients with CAD. preliminary evidence suggests mental stress testing for ischemia has prognostic significance. mental stressors can provoke ischemia (usually silent) in 40%-70% patients with CAD. Reference -. mental stress-induced ischemia more common than exercise-induced ischemia and associated with increased risk of cardiac events in cohort study of 124 patients with CAD (). type D personality associated with increased long-term mortality. based on cohort study. 303 patients with angiographically documented CHD completed personality questionnaires and were contacted 6-10 years later. 218 patients had type-D personality, defined as tendency to suppress emotional distress. mortality 27% in patients with type D personality vs. 7% in patients without (p < 0.0001). Reference -. type D personality associated with increased risk of major adverse coronary events. based on cohort study. 337 patients (mean age 57 years) with CAD followed for 5 years included. 76 patients had type D personality, defined as tendency to experience negative emotions and social inhibition. major adverse coronary events included cardiac death, MI, CABG and percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI]. type D personality associated with increased risk of major adverse coronary events (odds ratio 3.06, 95% CI 1.48-6.33). Reference -. chronic job strain associated with increased risk of recurrent CHD events after myocardial infarction. based on prospective cohort study. 972 patients aged 35-59 years who returned to work after first myocardial infarction (MI) and were followed for 6 years. CHD events included composite of fatal CHD, nonfatal MI, and unstable angina. chronic job strain associated with increased risk of recurrent CHD events (hazard ratio 2, 95% CI 1.08-3.72). Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. social class appears to have substantial influence on recovery of functional status after acute MI. based on cohort analysis of data from randomized trial. 2,145 men aged 29-69 years with acute MI from randomized trial included. patients in lowest social class had lowest percentage of functional recovery, those in highest social class had highest percentage of functional recovery. Reference -. patients' initial perceptions about their illness related to attendance at a rehabilitation program, speed of return to work, and resumption of normal activities. based on cohort study. 143 patients < 65 years old with their first MI included. attendance at rehabilitation course significantly related to stronger belief during admission that the illness could be cured or controlled. perception that the illness would last a short time and have less grave consequences associated with increased return to work within six weeks. belief that heart disease would have serious consequences was significantly associated with later disability in work around the house, recreational activities, and social interaction. strong illness identity significantly associated with greater sexual dysfunction. Reference - , commentary can be found in ACP J Club 1996 Nov-Dec;125(3):76.
_Complications and Prognosis|Prognosis|Test results|Other risk factors
resting heart rate ≥ 70 beats/minute associated with increased risk of cardiovascular death and morbidity in patients with stable CAD and left ventricular dysfunction. based on cohort analysis of data from randomized trial. 5,438 patients (mean age 65 years) with stable CAD and left-ventricular ejection fraction < 40% in placebo arm of BEAUTIFUL trial received placebo plus appropriate cardiovascular medication. patients followed median 19 months. mean heart rate at baseline 71.6 beats/minute. 84% patients additionally receiving beta blockers. patients with heart rates ≥ 70 beats/minute had increased risk for. cardiovascular death (p = 0.0041). admission to hospital for heart failure (p < 0.0001). admission to hospital for MI (p = 0.0066). coronary revascularization (p = 0.037). every increase of 5 beats/minute associated with increase in. cardiovascular death (p = 0.0005). admission to hospital for heart failure (p < 0.0001). admission to hospital for MI (p = 0.052). coronary revascularization (p = 0.034). Reference - , editorial can be found in. diastolic blood pressure < 70 mm Hg associated with higher risk of death, MI and stroke in patients with CAD. based on cohort analysis of data from randomized trial. 22,576 patients with hypertension and CAD from randomized trial included. Reference - , commentary can be found in ,. detection of ambulatory ischemia not of prognostic value for acute cardiac events. based on cohort study. 221 ambulatory patients (173 men, mean age 61) with stable CAD, assigned to medical therapy, followed average 51.5 months;. 135 had positive exercise test for ischemia. 85.5% patients prospectively stratified as low-risk for continued medical therapy (single-vessel disease, 2-vessel disease with negative exercise test, or left ventricular ejection fraction > 40%), 14.5% high risk (multivessel disease with ischemia or left ventricular dysfunction). ambulatory ST-segment monitoring, treadmill exercise testing, radionuclide ventriculography and coronary angiography performed in all patients. none of the clinical or noninvasive measures of ischemia were of prognostic significance in low-risk group, number of diseased vessels was most significant predictor of outcome followed by conventional risk stratification. for acute cardiac events, no variable tested was of prognostic significance. Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. red meat consumption. higher red meat or processed meat intake associated with increased all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. based on cohort study. 617,119 participants from National Institutes of Health (NIH)-American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) Diet and Health Study followed for 10 years. greater intake of red or processed meat associated with higher risk of. all-cause mortality in men and women. cardiovascular mortality in men and women. cancer mortality in men and women. greater intake of white meat associated with lower risk of. all-cause mortality in men and women. cancer mortality in men and women. Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. red meat consumption associated with increased risk of total, cardiovascular, and cancer mortality. based on pooled analysis of 2 prospective cohort studies. pooled analysis of 37,698 men from Health Professionals Follow-up Study (1986-2008) and 83,644 women from Nurses' Health Study (1980-2008) without cardiovascular disease or cancer at baseline who had dietary assessment at 4-year intervals. 23,926 deaths (including 5,910 cardiovascular deaths and 9,464 cancer deaths) occurred during 2.96 million person-years follow-up. 1 serving per day increase in unprocessed and processed red meat consumption associated with increased risk of total mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and cancer mortality (p < 0.05 for all). Reference - , commentary can be found in. medication adherence. adherence to statins and beta blockers associated with reduced mortality following AMI. based on cohort study. 31,455 elderly survivors of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) followed for median 2.4 years. compared to high adherence, increased mortality with low adherence to. statins (hazard ratio [HR] 1.25, 95% CI 1.09-1.42). beta blockers (HR 1.13, 95% CI 1.03-1.25). adherence to calcium channel blockers not associated with mortality. Reference - , commentary can be found in. self-reported nonadherence to prescribed medication associated with increased risk of death, MI and stroke. based on prospective cohort study. 1,015 outpatients with stable CHD evaluated over 3.9 years follow-up. 83 patients (8.2%) had nonadherence defined as taking prescribed medication ≤ 75% of time in self-report. cardiovascular events (coronary heart disease death, MI, stroke) occurred in 22.9% of nonadherent patients vs. 13.8% of adherent patients (p = 0.006). Reference - Heart and Soul Study ( ). female sex associated with decreased risk of cardiovascular death and myocardial infarction in patients with cardiovascular disease. based on cohort analysis of data from ONTARGET and TRANSCEND trials. 31,546 patients ≥ 55 years old (30% female) with cardiovascular disease or diabetes with end-organ damage followed for median 56 months. 75% of patients had coronary artery disease. 13% of patients had peripheral artery disease. 19.5% of patients had stroke or transient ischemic attack. 27% of patients had diabetes with end-organ damage. compared to male sex, female sex associated with. decreased risk of cardiovascular death (hazard ratio [HR] 0.83, 95% CI 0.75-0.92). decreased risk of myocardial infarction (HR 0.78, 95% CI 0.68-0.89). nonsignificant reduction in risk of stroke (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.77-1.01). no significant difference between sexes in hospitalization for heart failure. Reference -. fluctuation in body weight in patients with coronary artery disease associated with increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events and death. based on cohort analysis of data from randomized trial. 9,509 patients from Treating to New Targets (TNT) trial with coronary artery disease and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol < 130 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) who were randomized to atorvastatin 10 or 80 mg/day were followed for median 4.9 years. mean weight 85 kg (187 lbs) at baseline. cardiovascular events were composite of coronary death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, resuscitated cardiac arrest, revascularization, angina, cerebrovascular event, peripheral vascular disease, and heart failure. median fluctuation in body weight between visits was 1.76 kg (3.88 lbs). rates of cardiovascular events by weight fluctuation quintiles (p for trend < 0.001). 22.4% in patients with mean fluctuation 0.93 kg. 24.8% in patients with mean fluctuation 1.39 kg. 27.3% in patients with mean fluctuation 1.76 kg. 32.1% in patients with mean fluctuation 2.25 kg. 36.9% in patients with mean fluctuation 3.86 kg. each increase in fluctuation of 1.5-1.9 kg (3.3-4.19 lbs) associated with increased risk of death (adjusted hazard ratio 1.09, 95% CI 1.07-1.12). Reference -. persistently elevated C. pneumoniae IgA antibody levels associated with increased mortality from ischemic heart disease. based on prospective cohort study. 1,773 men aged 45-59 years tested for IgG and IgA antibodies to C. pneumoniae (TW183) by microimmunofluorescence and followed 13.7 years. 362 men (20.4%) had detectable IgA antibodies. presence of IgA antibodies associated with increased risk of. fatal ischemic heart disease (odds ratio [OR] 1.83, 95% CI 1.17-2.85). all-cause mortality (OR 1.5, 95% CI 1.1-2.04). no association of IHD incidence or mortality with immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels. Reference - , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. vital exhaustion or non-work-related burnout may increase risk of recurrent cardiovascular events in adults with coronary artery disease. based on systematic review of observational studies. systematic review of 13 observational studies (10 cohort and 3 case-control studies) evaluating association between vital exhaustion or non-work-related burnout and coronary artery disease events in 53,337 adults with or without preexisting CAD. vital exhaustion (excessive fatigue, increasing irritability, and demoralization) assessed with Quality of Life indices, Short Form-36 (SF-36), Maastricht Questionnaire, Reeder Stress Inventory, or Cognitive Behavioral Assessment Hospital Form. non-work-related burnout (chronic emotional exhaustion, cognitive weariness, and physical fatigue) assessed with Stress Profile Instrument, Shirom-Melamed Burnout Measure, or nonstandardized assessment. mean follow-up was 28 months. recurrent events included myocardial infarction, percutaneous coronary intervention, or chronic heart failure. in adults with coronary artery disease, vital exhaustion or non-work-related burnout associated with increased risk of recurrent events (pooled hazard ratio 2.03, 95% CI 1.54-2.68) in analysis of 7 studies with 1,873 adults. Reference -. binge drinking associated with increased mortality after AMI. based on prospective cohort study. 1,919 patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) at 45 United States hospitals 1989-1994. median follow-up 3.8 years. 250 patients (13%) reported binge drinking defined as 3 or more drinks within 1-2 hours (94% male). 318 patients (16.6%) died during follow-up. compared to nonbinge drinking, binge drinking associated with increased mortality (hazard ratio 2, 95% CI 1.3-3). Reference -.
_Prevention and Screening|Prevention
adherence to healthy lifestyle associated with decreased risk of coronary events regardless of genetic risk for CAD in adults (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on pooled analysis of observational studies. 55,685 adults in 4 observational studies (3 prospective cohort studies and 1 cross-sectional study) were stratified according to genetic risk for CAD and evaluated for association between adherence to healthy lifestyle and risk of coronary events. genetic risk was estimated using polygenic score including up to 50 single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with increased risk of CAD in prior studies; patients were stratified into quintiles according to genetic risk. healthy lifestyle defined as adherence to ≥ 3 of 4 healthy lifestyle factors (no current smoking, no obesity, physical activity at least once weekly, and healthy diet) and unhealthy lifestyle defined as adherence to ≤ 1 factor. high genetic risk (top quintile) associated with increased risk of coronary events compared to lowest quintile (hazard ratio 1.91, 95% CI 1.75-2.09) in analysis of 3 prospective cohort studies with 51,425 adults. consistent results for patients at intermediate genetic risk (quintiles 2-4), with greater risk of coronary events with increasing genetic risk. adherence to healthy lifestyle associated with decreased risk of coronary events compared to unhealthy lifestyle regardless of genetic risk category. 46% relative risk reduction among patients at high genetic risk. 47% relative risk reduction among patients at intermediate genetic risk. 45% relative risk reduction among patients at low genetic risk. Reference -. adherence to healthy lifestyle associated with decreased all-cause mortality and cardiovascular mortality, and prolonged life expectancy among adults in United States (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on population-based cohort study. 123,219 adults in Nurses’ Health Study and Health Professionals Follow-up Study were stratified by adherence to 5 low-risk lifestyle factors. 5 low-risk lifestyle factors included never smoking, body mass index 18.5-24.9 kg/m, ≥ 30 minutes/day of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity, moderate alcohol intake, and healthy diet. overall, 34% died during 34-year follow-up. adherence to all 5 low-risk lifestyle factors associated with decreased. all-cause mortality (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 0.26, 95% CI 0.22-0.31). cardiovascular mortality (adjusted HR 0.18, 95% CI 0.12-0.26). cancer mortality (adjusted HR 0.35, 95% CI 0.27-0.45). projected life expectancy at age 50 years comparing adherence to all 5 low-risk lifestyle factors vs. no low-risk factors among adults in United States. 43.1 years vs. 29 years in women (p < 0.05). 37.6 years vs. 25.5 years in men (p < 0.05). Reference -. see Cardiovascular Disease Prevention Overview for primary prevention of CAD. for secondary prevention, that is, risk reduction in patients with coronary heart disease, see Treatment above. see also. Smoking cessation. Dietary Considerations for Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction. Physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Recommendations for screening|United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendations
United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) finds current evidence insufficient to make recommendation for adding ankle-brachial index, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level, and coronary artery calcium score to traditional risk assessment for cardiovascular disease in asymptomatic adults for prevention of cardiovascular disease events (USPSTF Grade I). evidence inadequate to assess balance of risks and benefits of adding ankle-brachial index, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level, and coronary artery calcium (CAC) score to existing cardiovascular risk assessment models for the prevention of cardiovascular disease events. harms may include. radiation exposure from CAC score testing, though dosage relatively low. inappropriate risk reclassification, abnormal test results, and incidental findings which may lead to additional potential procedures and testing. Reference - , commentary can be found in , summary for patients can be found in. supporting systematic review can be found in. United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendations. screening with resting or exercise electrocardiography in asymptomatic adults at low risk for coronary heart disease events not recommended (USPSTF Grade D). insufficient evidence for or against testing in asymptomatic adults at intermediate or high risk for coronary heart disease events (USPSTF Grade I). Reference - USPSTF recommendation statement on screening for coronary heart disease with electrocardiography ( or at ), supporting systematic review can be found in.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Recommendations for screening|American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) 2013 guideline on cardiovascular risk assessment
reasonable to assess traditional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors every 4-6 years in adults aged 20-79 years without atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level B). traditional atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk factors include age, sex, total and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), systolic blood pressure, use of antihypertensive therapy, diabetes, and current smoking. reasonable to estimate 10-year atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk in adults aged 40-79 years without atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. for estimation of 10-year atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk. use of race- and sex-specific Pooled Cohort Equations recommended in non-Hispanic African Americans and non-Hispanic white patients aged 40-79 years without clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ACC/AHA Class I, Level B). Pooled Cohort Equations Cardiovascular (CV) Risk Calculator can be downloaded (in form of interactive spreadsheet with display for patient) from ; Pooled Cohort Equations may overestimate cardiovascular risk (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). for populations other than African Americans and non-Hispanic white patients. use of sex-specific Pooled Cohort Equations for non-Hispanic white patients may be considered due to lack of risk estimation systems specific to these populations (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). be aware that sex-specific Pooled Cohort Equations for non-Hispanic white patients may overestimate 10-year atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk, especially in Hispanic patients and Asian-American patients. if risk-based treatment decision is uncertain after quantitative risk assessment, consider assessment of ≥ 1 of (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level B). family history. high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP). coronary artery calcium (CAC) score. ankle-brachial index (ABI). no recommendation made for or against addition of any of the following to risk assessment of first atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease event. apolipoprotein B. chronic kidney disease. albuminuria. cardiorespiratory fitness. assessing 30-year or lifetime atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk based on traditional risk factors may be considered in adults aged 20-59 years without atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and who are not at high short-term risk (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). Reference - 2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Assessment of Cardiovascular Risk ( , PDF).
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Recommendations for screening|American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) 2010 guideline for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults
ACCF/AHA 2010 guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults developed in collaboration with. American Society of Echocardiography. American Society of Nuclear Cardiology. Society of Atherosclerosis Imaging and Prevention. Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. factors that should be obtained for risk assessment in all asymptomatic adults without history of coronary heart disease. global risk scores that use multiple traditional cardiovascular risk factors (such as Framingham Risk Score) (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). family history of atherothrombotic cardiovascular disease (ACCF/AHA Class I, Level B). for asymptomatic adults with diabetes. tests considered reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults with diabetes include. urinalysis to detect microalbuminuria (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). resting electrocardiogram (ECG) (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). measurement of coronary artery calcium (CAC) in adults ≥ 40 years old (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). HbA1c measurement may be considered for cardiovascular risk assessment (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). stress myocardial perfusion imaging may be considered for advanced cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults with diabetes, strong family history of coronary heart disease, or risk assessment testing suggesting high risk of coronary heart disease (such as CAC score ≥ 400) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). for asymptomatic adults with hypertension, tests considered reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment include. urinalysis to detect microalbuminuria (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). resting ECG (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level C). transthoracic echocardiography (to detect left ventricular hypertrophy) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). tests that may have a role for cardiovascular risk assessment in selected patients. HbA1c may be reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults without diagnosis of diabetes (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. CRP levels may be useful for selecting patients for statin therapy in patients who (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). are men ≥ 50 years old or women ≥ 60 years old. have low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) < 130 mg/dL (3.37 mmol/L). are not on lipid-lowering, hormone replacement, or immunosuppressant therapy. do not have clinical coronary heart disease, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, severe inflammatory conditions, or contraindications to statins. CRP levels may be reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic intermediate-risk men ≥ 50 years old or women ≥ 60 years old (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). CRP levels NOT recommended for cardiovascular risk assessment in. asymptomatic high-risk adults (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level B). low-risk men < 50 years old or women < 60 years old (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level B). urinalysis to detect microalbuminuria might be reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at intermediate risk without hypertension or diabetes (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) might be reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at intermediate risk (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). resting ECG may be considered for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults without hypertension or diabetes (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). measurement of carotid artery intima-media thickness reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at intermediate risk (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). measurement of ankle-brachial index (ABI) reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at intermediate risk (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). exercise ECG may be considered for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at intermediate risk (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). including sedentary adults considering starting vigorous exercise. consider non-ECG markers such as exercise capacity. computed tomography for coronary calcium. measurement of CAC reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at intermediate risk (10%-20% 10-year risk) (ACCF/AHA Class IIa, Level B). measurement of CAC may be reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at low-to-intermediate risk (6%-10% 10-year risk) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level B). measurement of CAC not recommended for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at low risk (< 6% 10-year risk) (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level B). stress myocardial perfusion imaging may be considered for advanced cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults with diabetes, strong family history of coronary heart disease, or risk assessment testing suggesting high risk of coronary heart disease (such as CAC score ≥ 400) (ACCF/AHA Class IIb, Level C). tests NOT recommended for coronary heart disease risk assessment in asymptomatic adults. genotype testing (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level B). measurement of lipid parameters (including lipoproteins, apolipoproteins, particle size, and density) beyond standard fasting lipid profile (total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol [HDL-C], LDL-C, triglycerides) (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). measurement of natriuretic peptides (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level B). peripheral arterial flow-mediated dilation studies (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level B). measures of arterial stiffness, such as pulse wave velocity (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). transthoracic echocardiography NOT recommended for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults without hypertension (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). stress echocardiography NOT indicated for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at low-or-intermediate-risk (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). stress myocardial perfusion imaging NOT indicated for cardiovascular risk assessment in asymptomatic adults at low-or-intermediate risk (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). coronary computed tomography angiography (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for detection of vascular plaque (ACCF/AHA Class III No Benefit, Level C). Reference - ACCF/AHA 2010 guideline on assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults ( , ), executive summary can be found in.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Recommendations for screening|Choosing Wisely recommendations
American College of Physicians recommends against obtaining screening exercise electrocardiogram testing in patients who are asymptomatic and at low risk for coronary heart disease (Choosing Wisely 2012 Apr 4). Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography recommends against. routinely ordering coronary computed tomography angiography for screening asymptomatic patients. ordering coronary artery calcium scoring for screening purposes on low risk asymptomatic patients, except for those with a family history of premature coronary artery disease. Reference - Choosing Wisely 2013 Feb 21. American Academy of Family Physicians recommends against ordering annual electrocardiograms (EKGs) or any other cardiac screening for low-risk patients without symptoms (Choosing Wisely 2013 Sep 24). Canadian Medical Association’s (CMA) Forum on General and Family Practice Issues, and College of Family Physicians of Canada recommend against ordering screening chest x-rays and electrocardiograms (ECGs) for asymptomatic or low risk outpatients (Choosing Wisely Canada 2014 Oct 29). Canadian Cardiovascular Society recommends against ordering annual electrocardiograms (ECGs) for low-risk patients without symptoms (Choosing Wisely Canada 2014 Apr 2). Royal Australian College of General Practitioners recommends against screening asymptomatic, low-risk patients (< 10% absolute 5-year cardiovascular [CV] risk) using electrocardiogram (ECG), stress test, coronary artery calcium score, or carotid artery ultrasound (Choosing Wisely Australia 2015 Apr 22).
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Recommendations for screening|Exercise testing guideline recommendations for screening
exercise testing not recommended for routine screening of asymptomatic men or women (ACC/AHA Class III). exercise testing reasonable for evaluation of people with diabetes who plan to start vigorous exercise (ACC/AHA Class IIa). exercise testing may be considered for. patients with multiple risk factors as a guide for risk-reduction therapy (ACC/AHA Class IIb). asymptomatic men > 45 years old and women > 55 years old who (ACC/AHA Class IIb). plan to start vigorous exercise. are involved in high-risk occupations. are at high risk for coronary disease because of other diseases such as peripheral arterial disease and chronic kidney disease. Reference - American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) 2002 guideline update for exercise testing ( ), summary can be found in.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Recommendations for screening|Recommendations for imaging tests in screening
guidelines are inconsistent regarding use of imaging for detection of CAD in asymptomatic patients. based on systematic review of 14 guidelines containing recommendations on imaging of asymptomatic CAD in general population. 8 guidelines recommended against or concluded there is insufficient evidence for testing of asymptomatic CAD. 6 guidelines recommended testing only patients at intermediate or high risk based on Framingham risk score. Reference - , editorial can be found at. insufficient evidence to recommend electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) as screening test. insufficient evidence to support computed tomography (CT) screening for CAD or coronary artery risk ( ). insufficient evidence to support use of EBCT screening in asymptomatic persons (). coronary calcium scoring by EBCT predicted cardiovascular events in 4,613 persons aged 50-70 years followed mean 4.3 years (), but commentator provides several reasons for not recommending routine use in screening ( ). coronary artery calcium screening predicts 5-year survival in asymptomatic smokers and nonsmokers. based on cohort study. 10,377 asymptomatic persons (40% current smokers) followed for 5 years. cumulative 5-year survival among smokers ranged from 99.5% with calcium score 0-10 to 81.4% with calcium score > 1,000. cumulative 5-year survival among nonsmokers ranged from 99.7% with calcium score 0-10 to 89.6% with calcium score > 1,000. Reference -. arguments for and against atherosclerosis imaging of asymptomatic persons can be found in and in. see also Computed tomography (CT) for coronary artery disease.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Risk prediction
see Cardiovascular risk assessment.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Evidence for patients with diabetes
screening for asymptomatic CAD in patients with diabetes type 2 not associated with decreased cardiac events or mortality (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial with insufficient power to exclude small difference. 1,123 patients with diabetes type 2 and no symptoms of CAD randomized to screening with adenosine-stress radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging vs. no screening. patients followed for mean 4.8 years. overall cumulative 5-year cardiac event rate 2.9%. no significant differences with screening vs. no screening. myocardial infarction (MI) in 1.3% vs. 1.7%. cardiac death in 1.4% vs. 1.2%. all-cause death in 3.2% vs. 2.7%. revascularization in 5.5% vs. 7.8%. secondary events (unstable angina, heart failure or stroke) in 3.7% vs. 2.5%. Reference - DIAD trial (), editorial can be found in. DynaMed commentary -- The cardiac event rate was significantly lower than the authors' anticipated. screening for CAD with coronary computed tomography angiography may not reduce mortality or cardiovascular adverse events but may reduce hospitalizations for heart failure in patients with type 1 or 2 diabetes (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on randomized trial with inadequate statistical power. 900 patients (mean age 62 years) with type 1 or 2 diabetes but without symptoms of CAD were randomized to 1 of 2 management strategies. routine screening for CAD by coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) with recommendations for medical management based on results. standard guideline-based optimal diabetes care with targets of HbA1c < 7%, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol < 100 mg/dL (2.59 mmol/L), and systolic blood pressure < 130 mm Hg. all patients had used antidiabetic medication for ≥ 1 year at baseline. mean follow-up 4 years. primary outcome was composite of all-cause mortality, nonfatal myocardial infarction, and unstable angina requiring hospitalization. power calculation based on expected 2-year event rate of primary outcome 16% in standard care group with 40% reduction in screening group. comparing routine screening with CCTA vs. standard care. primary outcome in 6.2% vs. 7.6% (not significant). ischemic major adverse cardiovascular events in 4.4% vs 3.8% (not significant). hospitalization for heart failure in 0.7% vs. 2.2% (p = 0.04, NNT 67). stroke or carotid revascularization procedure in 1.8% vs. 2% (not significant). Reference - FACTOR-64 trial (), editorial can be found in. screening men with type 2 diabetes for silent myocardial ischemia may have high detection rate for coronary artery stenosis. based on cohort study. 203 men and women aged 25-75 years with diabetes type 1 or type 2 and without symptoms of cardiovascular disease had exercise ECG. silent myocardial ischemia considered to be ruled out if patient able to complete exercise test with normal findings, thallium myocardial scintigraphy done if silent ischemia not ruled out. coronary angiography done if either test had positive findings. 61.5% completed exercise ECG (82% patients with type 1 diabetes, 50% patients with type 2 diabetes). 9.6% exercise ECG results were positive, 19% thallium tests among those not completing exercise test were positive. 10.9% patients with type 1 diabetes had positive screening tests with 4.2% incidence of significant coronary stenosis (defined as > 50% vessel narrowing on angiography). 18.4% patients with type 2 diabetes had positive screening tests with 12.7% incidence of significant stenosis. analysis by subgroup found 20.9% significant coronary artery stenosis among men with type 2 diabetes, and 2.3%-7.4% in all other subgroups. positive predictive value of screening was 87.5% in men with type 2 diabetes and much lower in all other groups. Reference - , editorial can be found in PDF, commentary can be found in PDF, PDF. maximum carotid intima-media thickness > 2.45 mm on ultrasound may detect severe CAD in asymptomatic patients with type 2 diabetes (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on diagnostic cohort study with unclear blinding. derivation cohort included 333 patients with type 2 diabetes and no history or symptoms of CAD. carotid intima-media thickness was measured using ultrasound. silent myocardial ischemia was assessed with exercise electrocardiogram or myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, and patients who were positive were further assessed using coronary computed tomography angiography or coronary angiography. validation cohort included 99 similar patients. 17 patients in derivation cohort (5%) and 20 patients in validation cohort (20%) had severe CAD leading to revascularization. 2 optimum cutoff values for maximum carotid intima-media thickness (for patients < 65 years old and patients ≥ 65 years old) determined from derivation cohort. diagnostic performance of carotid intima-media thickness ≥ 1.55 mm for diagnosis of severe CAD in patients < 65 years old (17% pretest probability in validation cohort) | | Derivation Cohort | Validation Cohort | Sensitivity | 100% | 100% | Specificity | 44% | 49% | Positive predictive value | 10% | 28% | Negative predictive value | 100% | 100% |. diagnostic performance of carotid intima-media thickness ≥ 2.65 mm for diagnosis of severe CAD in patients ≥ 65 years old (24% pretest probability in validation cohort) | | Derivation Cohort | Validation Cohort | Sensitivity | 100% | 82% | Specificity | 71% | 71% | Positive predictive value | 15% | 47% | Negative predictive value | 100% | 92% |. Reference -.
_Prevention and Screening|Screening|Further evaluation
further evaluation of positive screening tests in asymptomatic patients. Note: these recommendations are not an endorsement of any tests for screening asymptomatic patients, but are provided in recognition that patients may present for evaluation after such tests have been performed. testing considerations in asymptomatic patients with possible myocardial ischemia on ambulatory ECG monitoring, or severe coronary calcification on electron beam computed tomography (EBCT). exercise ECG testing without an imaging modality may be considered if absence of (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). pre-excitation (Wolff-Parkinson-White) syndrome. electronically paced ventricular rhythm. > 1 mm of ST depression at rest. complete left bundle-branch block. exercise perfusion imaging or exercise echocardiography may be considered if. pre-excitation (Wolff-Parkinson-White) syndrome (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). > 1 mm of ST depression at rest (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). adenosine or dipyridamole myocardial perfusion imaging may be considered if. unable to exercise (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). electronically paced ventricular rhythm (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). complete left bundle-branch block (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). inadequate exercise ECG (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). after exercise ECG testing in asymptomatic patients. if low-risk Duke treadmill score, further testing (exercise myocardial perfusion imaging, exercise echocardiography, adenosine or dipyridamole myocardial perfusion imaging, or dobutamine echocardiography) NOT recommended (ACC/AHA Class III, Level C). if intermediate-risk or high-risk Duke treadmill score, exercise myocardial perfusion imaging or exercise echocardiography may be considered (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). recommendations for coronary angiography for risk stratification in asymptomatic patients. consider for patients with high-risk criteria that suggest ischemia on noninvasive testing (ACC/AHA Class IIa, Level C). consider for patients with inadequate prognostic information after noninvasive testing (ACC/AHA Class IIb, Level C). NOT recommended for patients who prefer to avoid revascularization (ACC/AHA Class III, Level C). References. 2002 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines for management of patients with chronic stable angina (). 2007 focused update of the ACC/AHA 2002 guidelines for the management of patients with chronic stable angina ( ), correction can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol 2007 Dec 4;50(23):e1.
_Quality Improvement|Physician Quality Reporting System Quality Measures
6. Coronary Artery Disease (CAD): Antiplatelet Therapy. Percentage of patients ≥ 18 years old with a diagnosis of coronary artery disease seen within a 12-month period who were prescribed aspirin or Clopidogrel Hydrogen Sulfate. 7. Coronary Artery Disease (CAD): Beta-blocker Therapy - Prior Myocardial Infarction (MI) or Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD) (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] < 40%). Percentage of patients ≥ 18 years old with a diagnosis of coronary artery disease seen within a 12-month period who also have prior MI or a current or prior LVEF < 40% who were prescribed beta-blocker therapy. 118. Coronary Artery Disease (CAD): Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (ARB) Therapy - Diabetes or Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD) (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] < 40%). Percentage of patients ≥ 18 years old with a diagnosis of coronary artery disease seen within a 12-month period who also have diabetes OR a current or prior LVEF < 40% who were prescribed ACE Inhibitor or ARB therapy. 204. Ischemic Vascular Disease (IVD): Use of Aspirin or Another Antithrombotic. Percentage of patients ≥ 18 years old discharged alive for acute myocardial infarction (AMI), coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), or percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) in the 12 months prior to the measurement period, or who had an active diagnosis of ischemic vascular disease (IVD) during the measurement period, and who had documentation of use of aspirin or another antithrombotic during the measurement period. 242. Coronary Artery Disease (CAD): Symptom Management. Percentage of patients ≥ 18 years old with a diagnosis of CAD seen within a 12-month period with results of an evaluation of level of activity and an assessment of whether anginal symptoms are present or absent with appropriate management of anginal symptoms within a 12-month period. 243. Cardiac Rehabilitation Patient Referral from an Outpatient Setting. Percentage of patients evaluated in an outpatient setting who within the previous 12 months have experienced an acute myocardial infarction (MI), coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), cardiac valve surgery, or cardiac transplantation, or who have chronic stable angina (CSA) and have not already participated in an early outpatient cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention (CR) program for the qualifying event/diagnosis who were referred to a CR program. 324. Cardiac Stress Imaging Not Meeting Appropriate Use Criteria: Testing in Asymptomatic, Low-Risk Patients. Percentage of all stress single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI), stress echocardiogram (ECHO), cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA), and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) performed in asymptomatic, low coronary heart disease (CHD) risk patients ≥ 18 years old for initial detection and risk assessment. 438. Statin Therapy for the Prevention and Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease. percentage of the following patients who are all considered at high risk of cardiovascular events who were prescribed or were on statin therapy during the measurement period. adults ≥ 21 years old who were previously diagnosed with or currently have an active diagnosis of clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) OR. adults ≥ 21 years old with a fasting or direct low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol level ≥ 190 mg/dL OR. adults aged 40-75 years with a diagnosis of diabetes with a fasting or direct LDL cholesterol level of 70-189 mg/dL. see Physician Quality Reporting System Quality Measures for additional information.
_Quality Improvement|Quality and Outcomes Framework Indicators
CHD1. Contractor establishes and maintains a register of patients with coronary heart disease. CHD2. Percentage of patients with coronary heart disease in whom last blood pressure reading (measured in the preceding 12 months) is ≤ 150/90 mm Hg. CHD7. Percentage of patients with coronary heart disease who have had influenza immunization in the preceding August 1 to March 31. CHD5. Percentage of patients with coronary heart disease with a record in the preceding 12 months that aspirin, alternative antiplatelet therapy, or anticoagulant is being taken. SMOK2 (NM38). Percentage of patients with any or any combination of the following conditions: coronary heart disease, peripheral artery disease, stroke or transient ischemic attack, hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic kidney disease, asthma, schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, or other psychoses who have a record of smoking status in the preceding 12 months. SMOK5 (NM39). Percentage of patients with any or any combination of the following conditions: coronary heart disease, peripheral artery disease, stroke or transient ischemic attack, hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic kidney disease, asthma, schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, or other psychoses who smoke who have a record of an offer of support and treatment within preceding 12 months. see Quality and Outcomes Framework Indicators for additional information.
_Quality Improvement|Choosing Wisely
American College of Physicians recommends against obtaining screening exercise electrocardiogram testing in patients who are asymptomatic and at low risk for coronary heart disease (Choosing Wisely 2012 Apr 4). Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance recommends against performing coronary cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) in. the initial evaluation of asymptomatic patients. symptomatic patients with a history of coronary stents. Reference - Choosing Wisely 2014 Jan 16. Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography recommends against. routinely ordering coronary computed tomography angiography for screening asymptomatic patients. ordering coronary artery calcium scoring for screening purposes on low risk asymptomatic patients, except for those with a family history of premature coronary artery disease. Reference - Choosing Wisely 2013 Feb 21. American Academy of Family Physicians recommends against ordering annual electrocardiograms (EKGs) or any other cardiac screening for low-risk patients without symptoms (Choosing Wisely 2013 Sep 24).
_Quality Improvement|Choosing Wisely Canada
Canadian Medical Association’s (CMA) Forum on General and Family Practice Issues, and College of Family Physicians of Canada recommend against ordering screening chest x-rays and electrocardiograms (ECGs) for asymptomatic or low risk outpatients (Choosing Wisely Canada 2014 Oct 29). Canadian Cardiovascular Society recommends against ordering annual electrocardiograms (ECGs) for low-risk patients without symptoms (Choosing Wisely Canada 2014 Apr 2).
_Quality Improvement|Choosing Wisely Australia
Royal Australian College of General Practitioners recommends against screening asymptomatic, low-risk patients (< 10% absolute 5-year cardiovascular [CV] risk) using electrocardiogram (ECG), stress test, coronary artery calcium score, or carotid artery ultrasound (Choosing Wisely Australia 2015 Apr 22).
_Quality Improvement|American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) Performance Measures
American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI)/American Medical Association (AMA)-Convened Physician Consortium for Performance Improvement (PCPI)/National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) 2013 performance measures for adults undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention can be found in. ACC/AHA/American Medical Association (AMA)/Physician Consortium for Performance Improvement (PCPI) 2011 performance measures for adults with coronary artery disease and hypertension can be found in. American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation (AACVPR)/ACC/AHA. 2007 performance measures on cardiac rehabilitation for referral to and delivery of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention services can be found in. . PDF. 2010 update can be found in.
_Quality Improvement|Quality improvement evidence
tailored care plans for general practices and patients may reduce hospital admission for patients with coronary heart disease (level 2 [mid-level] evidence). based on cluster-randomized trial with allocation concealment not stated. 903 patients with established coronary heart disease randomized by practice to 1 of 2 groups. tailored care plans for practices (practice-based training in prescribing and behavior change, administrative support, quarterly newsletter) and tailored care plans for patients (motivational interviewing, goal identification, and target setting for lifestyle change) with reviews every 4 months. usual care. patients followed for 18 months. admission to hospital in 25.8% with intervention vs. 34% with usual care (p = 0.03, NNT 13). no significant difference in patients with levels above recommended limits in systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, or total cholesterol. Reference -.
_Guidelines and Resources|Guidelines|United States guidelines
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) scientific statement on eligibility and disqualification recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities (Task Force 8): coronary artery disease can be found in or in. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/American Medical Association (ACCF/AHA/AMA) 2011 performance measures for adults with coronary artery disease and hypertension can be found in or (correction can be found in Circulation 2011 Jul 12;124(2):e39). American College of Cardiology Foundation/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society of Thoracic Surgeons/American Association for Thoracic Surgery/American Heart Association/American Society of Nuclear Cardiology (ACCF/SCAI/STS/AATS/AHA/ASNC) appropriateness criteria on coronary revascularization can be found in , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in , also published in , , correction can be found in Circulation 2009 Apr 21;119(15):e488, editorial can be found in. focused update can be found in , correction can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Apr 3;59(14):1336, or in. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/American College of Physicians/American Association for Thoracic Surgery/Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society of Thoracic Surgeons (ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS) guideline on diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease can be found in or in , correction can be found in Circulation 2014 Apr 22;129(16):e463, summaries can be found in or in , editorial can be found in , executive summary can be found in , correction can be found in Circulation 2014 Apr 22;129(16):e462, 2014 focused update can be found in. American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons (ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS) appropriate use criteria for diagnostic catheterization can be found in or in or in. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) guideline on coronary artery bypass graft surgery can be found in PDF or , correction can be found in Circulation 2011 Dec 20;124(25):e957, executive summary can be found in , , correction can be found in J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2012 May;143(5):1235, editorial can be found in. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography (ACCF/AHA/SCAI) 2011 guideline on percutaneous coronary intervention can be found in , correction can be found in Circulation 2012 Feb 28;125(8):e412, also published in , , executive summary can be found in. 2015 focused update on primary percutaneous coronary intervention for patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction can be found in ; , correction can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol 2016 Mar 29;67(12):1506; or in , correction can be found in Circulation 2016 Mar 15;133(11):e442. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) guideline on management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) can be found in or in , correction can be found in Circulation 2013 Dec 24;128(25):e481, executive summary can be found in or in , correction can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol 2013 Sep 10;62(11):1039 or in. 2015 focused update on primary percutaneous coronary intervention for patients with STEMI can be found in ; , correction can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol 2016 Mar 29;67(12):1506; or in , correction can be found in Circulation 2016 Mar 15;133(11):e442. American Heart Association (AHA) recommendations of core components of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention can be found in. American College of Cardiology Foundation and American Heart Association (ACCF/AHA) 2010 guideline on assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults can be found in or in , executive summary can be found in. American College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriateness Criteria for nontraumatic aortic disease can be found at ACR 2013 PDF. testing. American College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriateness Criteria for asymptomatic patient at risk for coronary artery disease can be found at ACR 2013 PDF or in. American College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriateness Criteria for chronic chest pain (low-to-intermediate probability of coronary artery disease [CAD]) can be found at ACR 2012 PDF or in. ACR Appropriateness Criteria for chronic chest pain (high probability of CAD) can be found at ACR 2016 PDF. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/American Society of Echocardiography/American Society of Nuclear Cardiology/Heart Failure Society of American/Heart Rhythm Society/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance/Society of Thoracic Surgeons (ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS) 2013 multimodality appropriate use criteria for detection and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart disease can be found in. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American College of Radiology/American Heart Association/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging/Society of Atherosclerosis Imaging and Prevention/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography (ACCF/ACR/AHA/NASCI/SAIP/SCAI/SCCT) 2010 expert consensus on coronary computed tomographic angiography can be found in ,. American College of Cardiology Foundation/Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography/American College of Radiology/American Heart Association/American Society of Echocardiography/American Society of Nuclear Cardiology/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (ACCF/SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR) 2010 report on appropriate use criteria for cardiac computed tomography can be found in , ,. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American College of Radiology/Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance/American Society of Nuclear Cardiology/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society of Interventional Radiology (ACCF/ACR/SCCT/SCMR/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SIR) 2006 appropriateness criteria for cardiac computed tomography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can be found in , commentary can be found in. ACCF/ASNC/ACR/AHA/ASE/SCCT/SCMR/SNM 2009 appropriate use criteria on cardiac radionuclide imaging can be found in. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association/American College of Radiology/American Society of Echocardiography/American Society of Nuclear Cardiology/Heart Rhythm Society/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging/Radiological Society of North America/Society for Atherosclerosis Imaging and Prevention/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society for Cardiovascular Computed Tomography/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance/Society of Interventional Radiology (ACC/AHA/ACR/ASE/ASNC/HRS/NASCI/RSNA/SAIP/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/SIR) 2008 report on standards for key data elements and definitions in cardiac imaging can be found in , corrections can be found in J Am Coll Cardiol 2009 Jun 9;53(23):2230, also published in , correction can be found in Circulation 2009 Aug 4;120(5):e36. American College of Radiology/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging/Society for Pediatric Radiology (ACR/NASCI/SPR) practice parameter on performance and interpretation of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be found at ACR 2016 PDF. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American College of Radiology/American Heart Association/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (ACCF/ACR/AHA/NASCI/SCMR) 2010 expert consensus on cardiovascular magnetic resonance can be found in or in. American Heart Association consensus statement on role of noninvasive testing in clinical evaluation of women with suspected coronary artery disease can be found in. American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Society of Echocardiography/American Heart Association/American Society of Nuclear Cardiology/Heart Failure Society of America/Heart Rhythm Society/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions/Society of Critical Care Medicine/Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (ACCF/ASE/AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR) 2011 report on appropriate use criteria for echocardiography can be found in , , editorial can be found in. United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation statement on. risk assessment for cardiovascular disease with nontraditional risk factors can be found in , commentary can be found in , summary for patients can be found in. screening for cardiovascular disease risk with electrocardiography can be found in , supporting systematic review can be found in. National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry and IFCC Committee for standardization of markers of cardiac damage laboratory medicine practice guidelines on analytical issues for biochemical markers of acute coronary syndromes can be found in ,. primary and secondary prevention. American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on imaging for myocardial viability can be found in. American Heart Association (AHA) special report on ten-year differences in women's awareness related to coronary heart disease can be found in. American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on health literacy and cardiovascular disease: fundamental relevance to primary and secondary prevention can be found in. AHA scientific statement on treatment of hypertension in prevention and management of ischemic heart disease can be found in. American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Foundation (AHA/ACCF) guideline on secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease can be found in , , previous version can be found in. American College of Preventive Medicine (ACPM) position statement on atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease screening in adults can be found in PDF. American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines for Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis (9th ed.) recommendations on primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease can be found in , correction can be found in Chest 2012 April 1;141(4):1129. special considerations. American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on sexual activity and cardiovascular disease can be found in , commentary can be found in. American Heart Association/European Society of Cardiology (AHA/ESC) consensus document on sexual counseling for individuals with cardiovascular disease and their partners can be found in. American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder predispose youth to accelerated atherosclerosis and early cardiovascular disease can be found in PDF. American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on clinical management of stable coronary artery disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus can be found in. American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in South Asians in the United States: epidemiology, risk factors, and treatments can be found in. Heart Failure Society of America (HFSA) guideline section on evaluation and therapy for heart failure in the setting of ischemic heart disease can be found at , complete guideline can be found in. American Heart Association recommendations for depression screening, referral and treatment in coronary heart disease patients can be found in. AHA/ACC recommendation for influenza vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovascular disease repeated in. American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Foundation/Heart Rhythm Society (AHA/ACCF/HRS) recommendations and scientific statements on standardization and interpretation of electrocardiograms (ECGs). review of ECG technology and improving accuracy and clinical utility in practice can be found in , or in. statement on diagnostic terms for ECG interpretation can be found in , or in. statement on intraventricular conduction disturbances can be found in or in. statement on T segment, T and U waves, and QT interval can be found in or in. statement on ECG changes associated with cardiac chamber hypertrophy can be found in or in. statement on acute ischemia/infarction can be found in or in.
_Guidelines and Resources|Guidelines|United Kingdom guidelines
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidelines on. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) clinical guideline on risk assessment and reduction including lipid modification for cardiovascular disease can be found at PDF, updated September 2016, summary can be found in. secondary prevention in primary and secondary care for patients following myocardial infarction can be found at PDF, summary can be found in. myocardial perfusion scintigraphy using single photon emission CT (SPECT) for diagnosis and management of angina and myocardial infarction can be found at PDF, partially updated by management of stable angina at PDF and chest pain of recent onset at PDF. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) guidelines on. cardiac arrhythmias in coronary heart disease can be found at SIGN 2018 Sep PDF. cardiac rehabilitation can be found at SIGN 2017 Jul PDF. Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis Research/Austrian Society for Anesthesiology, Resuscitation and Intensive Care/European Society for Cardiology (GTH/ÖGARI/ESC) guideline on peri-operative management of antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease can be found in. British Cardiovascular Society (BCS) guideline on fitness to fly for passengers with cardiovascular disease can be found in.
_Guidelines and Resources|Guidelines|Canadian guidelines
Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS). CCS guideline on diagnosis and management of stable ischemic heart diseases can be found in. CCS consensus conference summary on assessment of cardiac patient for fitness to fly can be found in. CCS consensus conference summary on assessment of cardiac patient for fitness to drive can be found in. CCS focused position statement update on fitness following left ventricular assist device implementation can be found in. CCS consensus conference on women and ischemic heart disease can be found in PDF. CCS/CAR/CANM/CNCS/Can SCMR joint position statement on advanced noninvasive cardiac imaging using PET, MRI and multi-detector CT in diagnosis and evaluation of ischemic heart disease can be found in PDF. Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Society of Echocardiography Consensus Panel guideline on provision of echocardiography in Canada can be found in PDF.
_Guidelines and Resources|Guidelines|European guidelines
Finnish Medical Society Duodecim/Finnish Cardiac Society current care guideline on stable coronary artery disease can be found at Duodecim 2015 Apr PDF [Finnish]. S3 Leitlinie Chronische koronare Herzerkrankung (KHK) finden Sie unter PDF [Deutsch]. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Angiologie, Gesellschaft für Gefässmedizin Leitlinie zur Diagnostik, Therapie und Nachsorge der peripheren arteriellen Verschlusskrankheit finden Sie unter AWMF 2015 Sep PDF [Deutsch]. European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines on. management of stable coronary artery disease can be found in. management of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy can be found in or in [French]. European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guideline on diagnosis and treatment of aortic diseases can be found in , correction can be found in Eur Heart J 2015 Nov 1;36(41):2779, commentary can be found in. European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (ESC/EACTS) guideline on myocardial revascularization can be found in. Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare (NBHW) guidelines on cardiac care can be found at NBHW 2018 Jun PDF. European Association of Nuclear Medicine/European Society of Cardiac Radiology/European Council of Nuclear Cardiology (EANM/ESCR/ECNC) position statement on hybrid cardiac imaging: SPECT/CT and PET/CT can be found in , commentary can be found in. Polish Clinical Forum for Cardiovascular Imaging expert consensus statement on myocardial viability imaging in ischaemic heart disease. part 1: current role of echocardiography and CMR can be found in [Polish]. part 2: current role of radionuclide imaging can be found in [Polish]. French Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics/French Society of Cardiology consensus statement on management of coronary artery disease in older adults can be found in. Austrian Societies of Cardiology and Radiology clinical guideline on current role of multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) in diagnosis of coronary artery disease can be found in [German].
_Guidelines and Resources|Guidelines|Asian guidelines
Asian Society of Cardiovascular Imaging (ASCI) guideline on appropriateness criteria for cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can be found in. Japanese Circulation Society (JCS) guidelines on clinical use of cardiac nuclear medicine can be found in PDF. JCS 2012 guidelines on primary prevention of ischemic heart disease can be found at JCS 2012 PDF [Japanese].
_Guidelines and Resources|Guidelines|Quality indicators
17 quality indicators for care of ischemic heart disease in vulnerable elders can be found in.
_Guidelines and Resources|Review articles
review of stable ischemic heart disease can be found in. review of perivascular adipose tissue and coronary atherosclerosis can be found in. review unraveling vascular inflammation: from immunology to imaging can be found in. review of monocyte and haematopoietic progenitor reprogramming as a common mechanism underlying chronic inflammatory and cardiovascular diseases can be found in. review of triglycerides as risk factors can be found in. review of biomechanical stress in coronary atherosclerosis: emerging insights from computational modelling can be found in. review of cardiovascular remodelling in coronary artery disease and heart failure can be found in. management of stable coronary artery disease. review of treatment of stable coronary artery disease can be found in. review of management of stable CAD can be found in. review of management of stable CAD can be found in. review of management of stable coronary disease can be found in , commentary can be found in. review of the evolving future of PCSK9 inhibitors can be found in. specific populations. review of sex-related differences in CAD can be found in. review of systemic and coronary circulation in adults over age 60 can be found in. review of treatment strategies for women with coronary artery disease can be found at PDF. review of imaging modalities for diagnosing CAD in women can be found in. review of coronary heart disease in women can be found at , , commentary can be found in. review of coronary artery disease in patients ≥ 80 years old can be found in. review on atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in South Asians in the United States: epidemiology, risk factors, and treatments can be found in. prevention. review of secondary prevention (cardiac rehabilitation) can be found in , correction can be found in BMJ 2004 Apr 17;328(7445):926. review of secondary prevention can be found in. review of secondary prevention of coronary heart disease (CHD) in elderly patients can be found in. review of prevention and management of radiation-induced coronary artery disease can be found in. review of global risk of CHD: assessment and application can be found in , editorial can be found in , commentary can be found in. review of biomarkers in stable coronary artery disease can be found in. review of vulnerable plaques and patients can be found in. review of interleukin-1 beta as target for atherosclerosis therapy: biological basis of CANTOS and beyond can be found in. review of controversies in stable CAD can be found in , commentary can be found in. review of coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction can be found in , correction can be found in N Engl J Med 2012 Mar 8;366(10):970, commentary can be found in. review of coronary calcium score and cardiovascular risk can be found in. fractional flow reserve. review of fractional flow reserve: accuracy, prognostic implications, and limitations can be found in. review of evolving future of instantaneous wave-free ratio and fractional flow reserve can be found in PDF. review of molecular imaging of atherosclerosis: spotlight on Raman spectroscopy and surface-enhanced Raman scattering can be found in. review of gene therapy, protein therapy and cellular therapy for therapeutic angiogenesis in CAD can be found in. review of stem and progenitor cell-based therapy in ischemic heart disease can be found in. review of socioeconomic status and incidence, treatment, and outcomes of cardiovascular disease can be found in. policy statement from American Heart Association on costs of informal caregiving in patients with CAD can be found in. review of guidelines for driver qualifications with various cardiovascular disorders can be found in. review of air travel after MI can be found in. invasive assessment and imaging. review of diagnostic and prognostic role for invasive functional assessment in patients considered for coronary artery bypass grafting can be found in. review of intravascular imaging in coronary artery disease can be found in. reviews of noninvasive imaging. review of role of cardiovascular magnetic resonance in management of patients with stable coronary artery disease can be found in. review of noninvasive cardiac imaging can be found in , editorial can be found in. review of computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography can be found in. review of new imaging techniques (intravascular ultrasonography, multiple-slice coronary CT angiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) for diagnosing coronary artery disease can be found in , commentary can be found in. AHRQ comparative effectiveness review on noninvasive technologies for diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD) in women can be found at PDF. review of noninvasive imaging in asymptomatic patients with diabetes can be found in. review of cardiovascular MRI can be found in. review of noninvasive tests for known or suspected stable CAD can be found in , commentary can be found in. cardiac rehabilitation. review of cardiac rehabilitation: improving function and reducing risk can be found in. review of cardiac rehabilitation can be found in , editorial can be found in. overview of Cochrane reviews evaluating cardiac rehabilitation for patients with heart disease can be found in. review of advances in rehabilitation for chronic diseases can be found in. Applied Evidence review of long-term management of unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction can be found in. case presentation of giant right coronary artery aneurysms can be found in.
_Patient Information
handouts from EBSCO Health Library on. or in. or in. or in. diagnosis. or in. or in. or in. or in. treatment. or in. or in. or in. handout from or in. handout from Institut für Qualität und Wirtschaftlichkeit im Gesundheitswesen (IQWiG) in English PDF or in German PDF. handout on cardiac catheterization from.
_ICD Codes|ICD-10 codes
I20 angina pectoris. I20.0 unstable angina. I20.1 angina pectoris with documented spasm. I20.8 other forms of angina pectoris. I20.9 angina pectoris, unspecified. I25 chronic ischaemic heart disease. I25.0 atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, so described. I25.1 atherosclerotic heart disease. I25.2 old myocardial infarction. I25.3 aneurysm of heart. I25.4 coronary artery aneurysm. I25.5 ischaemic cardiomyopathy. I25.6 silent myocardial ischaemia. I25.8 other forms of chronic ischaemic heart disease. I25.9 chronic ischaemic heart disease, unspecified. I51 complications and ill-defined descriptions of heart disease. I51.0 cardiac septal defect, acquired. I51.1 rupture of chordae tendineae, not elsewhere classified. I51.2 rupture of papillary muscle, not elsewhere classified. I51.3 intracardiac thrombosis, not elsewhere classified. I51.4 myocarditis, unspecified. I51.5 myocardial degeneration. I51.6 cardiovascular disease, unspecified. I51.7 cardiomegaly. I51.8 other ill-defined heart diseases. I51.9 heart disease, unspecified.
