SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

 

NETWORK SCIENCE

Optimal network topology for responsive
collective behavior

David Mateo",

  

 

laj Horsevad', Vahid Hassani", Mohammadreza Chamanbaz'”, Roland Bouffanai

 

Animals, humans, and multi-robot systems operate in dynamic environments, where the ability to respond to
‘changing circumstances is paramount. An effective collective response requires suitable information transfer
among agents and thus critically depends on the interaction network. To investigate the influence of the
network topology on collective response, we consider an archetypal model of distributed decision-making and
study the capacity of the system to follow a driving signal for varying topologies and system sizes. Experiments
with a swarm of robots reveal a nontrivial relationship between frequency of the driving signal and optimal
network topology. The emergent collective response to slow-changing perturbations increases with the degree
Of the interaction network, but the opposite is true for the response to fast-changing ones. These results have far-

 

Copyright ©2019
‘The Authors, some
fights saved:
excuse lense
American Association
for the Advancement
of Sclnce No clan to
ofginaUS Goverment
Works. Dsbutes
under a Cieatwe
{Commons Atrbuton
Noncommercial
License 40 (CC BY.NC)

 

19 implications for the design and understanding of distributed systems: a dynamic rewiring of the inter-

action network is essential to effective collective operations at different time scales.

INTRODUCTION
[A wide range of complex systems are characterized by relatively simple
‘dynamical rules while sil producing excessively complex emergent col-
lective behaviors. Examples abound in the natural world [eg. a flock of
binds, a school of fish, a swarm of insects (9), in social systems [eg.,
social networks (10-12)], and in engineered multi-agent systems leg,
self-organized networks of mobile sensors, mult-vehicle coordination,
and swarm robotics systems (13-16)]

Historically, particular attention has been directed toward in.
vestigating varieties of collective behaviors obtained by testing a wide
range of local agent-to-agent interaction rules (6, 9). Collective beha-
viors have also been investigated from the network-theoretic perspec-
tive (4 8, 7-21) It is now clear that such rich collective behaviors are
the outcome of a complex interplay between network topology—
characteristic ofthe group-level organization—and the dynamical laws
at the agent’ level (4, 8, 20-22)

Many collective behaviors can be studied through the lens of distrib
uted consensus problems, including collective motion in animal groups
‘and multi-robot systems. Over the past decade, the number of studies
‘on decentralized consensus and cooperation in networked multi-agent
systems has experienced a spectacular growth, with concomitant devel
‘opments in various fields of engineering and science (2, 3, 23-26). Con-
sensus dynamics isthe comerstone of cooperative contro strategies for
vehicular formation (13, 16, 23), swarm robotics (14, 15), and synchro-
nization of coupled oscillators (23, 27). Decentralized consensus is also
at the core of collective opinion dynamics and complex contagion pro-
cesses in social networks (10-12), as well as complex collective te
sponses in biological swarms (3-8).

Previous studies focused on establishing the influence of the interac
tion network topology on (i) the capacity ofthe collective to reach con-
sensus in the presence of noise, communication constraints, and time
delays (21, 23); (i) the speed of consensus (ie, its convergence rate)
(18, 25, 28); (ii) the stability and stabilization of consensus (23); and
(iv) the ability to steer the system toward a particular consensus value
bby means of various control techniques such as pinning control, co
‘operative tracking control, or model reference consensus (19, 20)

  

‘Singapore University of Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Road, Singapore
487372, Singapore. “Arak University of Technology, Daneshgah Road, Arak ran,
‘Corresponding author. Email david mateowaldetramaagmallcom

Mateo etal, Sc Adv. 2019;5:09840099 3 April 2019

However, the effects of the network topology on other dynamical
properties of distributed multi-agent systems such as their adaptivity
‘or responsiveness to external perturbations have received considera
bly less attention (4).

Itis important to emphasize that a capacity for fast consensus is not
necessarily indicative of a responsive collective behavior. For instance,
ferromagnets at low temperature exhibit a global spontaneous magne-
tization—a process that can be described by a distributed consensus
protocol. It is known that both the degree of consensus (ie, magneti-
zation) and the speed at which it is reached increase with decreasing
temperature, but the capacity of the system to respond to external per-
turbations is maximized ata finite critical temperature.

Similarly, in the context of animal collective motion, it has been
observed that midges exhibit low levels of ordering while maintain-
ing large connected correlations, thus having a high collective re-
sponse (5). With these observations, the authors eloquently argued
that one must be careful in relating collective order (ie, degree of
consensus) with the collective responsiveness. The collective response
of the animal group was obtained experimentally by measuring the
correlations in the fluctuations of their behavior. While inferring a col-
lective response to external perturbations from these fluctuations is
not formally justified for out-of-equilibrium systems, extensive nu-
merical studies (29) have shown that this equivalence holds in the
context of collective motion based on distributed heading consensus.
Moreover, simulations have shown that this measure of susceptibility
is a good indicator of the group's performance in biologically relevant
functions such as predator avoidance (8). These facts along with other
empirical evidence have led to the conclusion that responsiveness,
rather than high consensus or order, is the true hallmark of collective
behavior (3)

‘To study how the responsiveness of a collective is affected by its in-
teraction network topology, we consider an elementary example of dis-
tributed decision-making: a linear time-invariant (LI) system of agents
performing consensus over a scalar state variable. The agents—ie, the
nodes ofthe interaction network—are all identical, except for one “ead-
er” [also known as “stubborn” agent in some contexts (12, 25)] with
some arbitrary predefined dynamics. From the control-theoretic per-
spective, this leader introduces a time-varying control input signal into
the system. In the biological context, this dynamical leader represents a
member ofa swarm with access to privileged information about a food

1 of 10

6102 "y tidy uo /610'Sewooustos seouenpe/rdiy wow pepeOUMOG
